Situation at a glanceThe Ministry of Health and Population (Ministère de la Santé et de la Population - MSP) of the Republic of the Congo, declared on 17 July 2023 a suspected triple outbreak of gastroenteritis, with typhoid fever, shigellosis, and cholera as probable causes.Since the first case was reported on 28 June 2023, and as of 29 August 2023, a total of 2389 suspected cases have been reported, including 52 deaths (overall Case Fatality Rate (CFR) 2.2%).Laboratory analyses performed by the National Public Health Laboratory, identified 83 cases of Shigella, 22 of Salmonella Typhi (S. Typhi) and 21 cases of Vibrio cholerae with toxigenicity testing of the strain not performed.The city of Dolisie, the capital of Niari Department in the western part of the country is the epicentre of this outbreak.With WHO support, the MSP has activated a multisectoral coordination mechanism, strengthening surveillance, laboratory and clinical care capacities, and implementing decontamination and risk communication activities. An in-depth epidemiological investigation is also being led by the MSP.WHO assesses the risk posed by this triple outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.Description of the situationOn 14 July 2023, the Ministry of Health and Population of the Republic of the Congo reported 1384 cases whose dominant symptomatology was fever (39°C and 40°C), headaches, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, and fatigue.On 17 July 2023, the MSP officially declared a suspected triple outbreak of gastroenteritis, with typhoid fever, shigellosis, and cholera as probable causes.The first case of the outbreak was reported on 28 June 2023. Since then, and as of 29 August 2023, a total of 2389 suspected cases have been reported, including 52 deaths (overall CFR 2.2%). Suspected typhoid fever cases accounted for 50.2% (n=1200) of all cases, followed by shigellosis (46.9%; n=1120) and cholera (2.9%; n=69).Eighty-eight (3.7%) of the suspected cases have undergone emergency surgery due to an intestinal perforation, a complication known to occur in untreated typhoid fever.The city of Dolisie - the capital of Niari Department with a population of more than 110 000 inhabitants - is the current epicentre of this outbreak, with 2178 suspected cases (91.2% of all cases) and 33 deaths (CFR 1.5%) reported for all three infectious diseases combined.Figure 1. Distribution of suspected cases of typhoid fever, shigellosis, and cholera by date of reporting, Dolise, Niari Department, 28 June - 29 August 2023 (n=2178).Since the beginning of this outbreak, Dolisie has registered an overflow of health facilities with more than 600 suspected cases admitted during July-August. A reduction in the number of admitted patients has been observed since September.Five other departments in the Republic of Congo (Bouenza, Brazzaville, Kouilou, Pointe-Noire and Pool) have also reported suspected cases.Of the 2071 cases (86.7%) with information on age and sex, 51.6% (n=1068) were females, and the most affected age group was 11-20 years (n=674; 32.5%), followed by the 0-10 age group (n=506; 24.4%) and the 21-30 age group (n=403; 19.4%).Figure 2. Age and sex distribution among suspected cases (n=2071).The available isolation results from the National Public Health Laboratory (LNSP) are distributed as follows (the number of samples tested is not known):The results of the antibiogram conducted on 78 samples of stool analysed, indicated a resistance and/or reduced susceptibility to carbapenems, third generation cephalosporins, and quinolones in several of the reported isolates of Shigella and Salmonella, while most of S. Typhi isolates are reported to be susceptible to ciprofloxacin (the number of the antibiogram results by pathogen and drug is unknown).Epidemiology of the diseasesCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated. The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS).After decades of progress against cholera, an upsurge has been recorded in several countries since 2021. From 1 January 2023 to 15 August 2023, at least 28 countries have reported cholera cases, compared with 16 countries in the same period of 2022. The WHO African Region is the most affected region with 16 countries reporting cholera cases since the beginning of 2023. In Congo, from 1997 to 2016, a total of six cholera outbreaks have been reported, with the last occurred in Mpouya (Plateaux Department), with 18 cases including three deaths (CFR 16.7%).Shigellosis is a gastrointestinal infection caused by one of four species of Shigella bacteria (Shigella sonnei, S. flexneri, S. boydii and S. dysenteriae). It is found in the intestinal tract of infected people and can be transmitted through the faecal-oral route by direct or indirect contact (e.g., through flies) with faeces from an infected person, fomites, consumption of contaminated food or water and person-to-person contact. Sustained sexual transmission has become an important component of Shigella species epidemiology. Humans are the only reservoir and can excrete bacteria in their stools for weeks after a dysenteric episode. Adequate antibiotic treatment can reduce the carriage status. Asymptomatic carriers can also contribute to the spread of the disease. Fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, and azithromycin are recommended to treat more severe cases with underlying conditions or to limit transmission.Typhoid fever is a life-threatening infection caused by the bacterium Salmonella Typhi. It is usually spread through contaminated food or water. Once Salmonella Typhi bacteria are ingested, they multiply and spread into the bloodstream. Symptoms include prolonged fever, fatigue, headache, nausea, abdominal pain, and constipation or diarrhoea. Some patients may have a rash. Severe cases may lead to serious complications, such as intestinal perforation, or even death. Patients can be treated with antibiotics although increasing resistance to different types of antibiotics is making treatment more complicated. WHO has prequalified two typhoid conjugate vaccines since December 2017 and are being introduced into childhood immunization programs in typhoid-endemic countries.Although no epidemiological baseline data is available for previous years, the high number of suspected cases and deaths of suspected typhoid fever and Shigella reported within two months, led to an overflow of health facilities as well as the high number of patients reported that have undergone surgical intervention due to intestinal perforation, are considered unusual.Although sporadic cholera outbreaks have been reported in the Republic of Congo, the city of Dolisie, the current epicentre, has not previously recorded such an outbreak. Cholera outbreaks are ongoing in the neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cameroon, but no epidemiolocal link has been identified. So far, no disease spread to other countries has been reported linked to this outbreak.WHO assesses the risk at the national level as high. This is based on the rapid outbreak dynamic and high morbidity and mortality of this outbreak, the strain on the health care system and high risk of healthcare–associated infections, the limited access to safe drinking water in Dolisie, the poor water and sanitation infrastructure, poor hygiene practices, and the observed limitations in the rapid detection, confirmation, and management of suspected cases. The limited information available on laboratory confirmations and implicated antimicrobial resistance (AMR) profiles further complicates the tailoring of an effective public health response. Regional and global levels of risk are considered moderate and low, respectively.The outbreak highlights the importance of public health measures to prevent the spread of resistant and non-resistant pathogens. Since this outbreak involves multiple Gram-negative bacteria, special attention should be paid to the possible presence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) and carbapenemases, as they can spread horizontally between species and further complicate treatment. Additionally, although S. typhi isolates are reported to be susceptible to ciprofloxacin, reported resistance to nalidixic acid might indicate reduced susceptibility to fluoroquinolones.While emerging resistance in S. typhi would indeed complicate treatment, typhoid fever remains common in places with poor sanitation and a lack of safe drinking water. Access to safe water and adequate sanitation, hygiene among food handlers and typhoid vaccination are the main and most important recommendations. WHO recommends typhoid vaccination in response to confirmed outbreaks of typhoid fever and recommends vaccination should be considered for travellers to typhoid-endemic areas. Further, where the typhoid conjugate vaccine (TCV) is licensed, WHO recommends TCV (among the available typhoid vaccines) as the preferred vaccine in view of its improved immunological properties. Typhoid vaccination should be implemented in the context of other efforts to control the disease. Also, seeing how quickly S. typhi can acquire new resistance mechanisms, WHO recommends strengthening surveillance of antimicrobial resistance to monitor known resistance, detect new and emerging resistance, control its spread and share the surveillance data locally and internationally in a timely manner.For surveillance, prompt detection and reporting of cases of bloody diarrhoea is the essential first step to monitoring endemic shigellosis and controlling epidemic shigellosis. Laboratory surveillance should be used to isolate and identify Shigella and perform antimicrobial susceptibility testing. State Parties are encouraged to refer to WHO guidance documents on foodborne disease surveillance and response.WHO recommends improving access to clean water and sanitation to prevent cholera transmission. Strengthening surveillance, especially at the community level, is advised. Appropriate case management, including improving access to care by establishing cholera treatment centers and oral rehydration points in the community, should be implemented in outbreak-affected areas to reduce mortality. Oral cholera vaccines (OCV) should be used in conjunction with improved water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in areas known to be at high risk for cholera. It is necessary to ensure that countries are prepared to quickly detect and respond to any cholera outbreak to reduce the risk of it spreading to new areas.WHO recommends infection prevention and control, water, sanitation, and hygiene, waste management and food safety practices at health facilities be closely monitored and improved where gaps are identified, particularly for facilities experiencing surges of patients. Contact precautions, including isolation of cases, should be enabled in health facilities for all patients who present with acute onset of gastroenteric symptoms, particularly for those experiencing incontinence. Efforts should be made to avoid cohort isolation of patients with different gastroenteric infections. Health facilities should closely monitor for instances where inpatients who are admitted for other reasons develop symptoms of gastroenteric infection beyond 48 hours admission as an inpatient, as this is indicative of potential healthcare-associated infection.WHO advises against applying any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event. Citable reference: World Health Organization (21 September 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Suspected triple outbreak of typhoid fever, shigellosis and cholera – Congo. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON488Situation at a glanceOn 12 September 2023, local public health authorities in France identified a cluster of 10 cases with suspected botulism, including one death. As of 14 September 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for France has notified WHO of a total of 15 cases of suspected botulism, including one death, reported in Bordeaux and Ile-de-France.The epidemiological investigations indicated that the source of infection is the consumption of homemade preserved sardines , on different dates, at the same restaurant in Bordeaux during the week of 4–10 September 2023. The food item was made at the restaurant for consumption on premises.Due to the incubation period of up to eight days and the restaurant attracting international visitors during the Rugby World Cup, there is a possibility that additional cases among international visitors may be reported in France, or possibly outside France as travellers returned home, until 18 September.Description of the situationOn 12 September 2023, local public health authorities in France identified a cluster of 10 cases with suspected botulism, including one death.As of 14 September 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for France has notified a total of 15 cases of suspected botulism, including one death, reported in Bordeaux and Ile-de-France. Of these 15 cases, 10 have been hospitalised, with eight patients being admitted to an Intensive Care Unit. Fourteen out of the 15 cases are reported among foreign citizens identified from six countries in addition to France. These include Canada, Germany, Greece, Ireland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America. All suspected cases consumed the same product (sardines in jars) on different dates at the same restaurant in Bordeaux during the week of 4–10 September 2023. The epidemiological investigations indicated that the source of infection is the consumption of homemade preserved sardines. The food item was produced and served at the restaurant.Epidemiology of the BotulismBotulism is a serious neurological condition caused by a very potent toxin produced by the bacterium  Clostridium botulinum . It develops particularly in poorly preserved foods. Human botulism may refer to foodborne botulism, infant botulism, wound botulism, and inhalation botulism or other types of intoxication.Foodborne botulism is a serious, potentially fatal disease. It is an intoxication caused by ingestion of potent neurotoxins—the botulinum toxins—formed in contaminated foods. Person-to-person transmission of botulism does not occur. The manifestations, or symptoms, of intoxication can vary, and  is characterized by descending, flaccid paralysis that can cause respiratory failure. Early symptoms include marked fatigue, weakness and vertigo, usually followed by blurred vision, dry mouth and difficulty in swallowing and speaking. Vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation and abdominal swelling may also occur. The disease can progress to weakness in the neck and arms, after which the respiratory muscles and muscles of the lower body are affected. There is no fever and no loss of consciousness. Symptoms usually appear from several hours up to 8 days following consumption of contaminated food.Although botulism outbreaks are relatively rare, they are considered public health emergencies that require rapid recognition to identify the disease source, distinguish outbreak types (between natural, accidental or deliberate), prevent additional cases and effectively administer treatment to affected patients. Successful treatment depends significantly on early diagnosis and the rapid administration of the botulinum antitoxin and intensive respiratory care.Incidence of botulism is low, but the mortality rate is high if prompt diagnosis and appropriate, immediate treatment is not given. The disease can be fatal in 5% to 10% of cases.Local investigations have identified an estimated 25 persons through credit card receipts who have been exposed (i.e., who likely consumed the suspect food item). The exposure occurred at local level and measures have been implemented to eliminate the source of infection including the removal of the suspected food item, which was not distributed outside the venue. However, given the ranging incubation period of botulism—up to eight days—and that not all customers of the restaurant in Bordeaux may have been identified despite efforts, further cases linked to this event may still occur. This outbreak has occurred at the same time as the Rugby World Cup held from the week of 4 September 2023 attracting followers and rugby teams from all over the world. Prevention of foodborne botulism is based on good practice in food preparation particularly during heating/sterilization and hygiene. Foodborne botulism may be prevented by the inactivation of the bacterium and its spores in heat-sterilized (for example, retorted) or canned products, or by inhibiting bacterial growth and toxin production in other products. The vegetative forms of bacteria can be destroyed by boiling, but the spores can remain viable after boiling even for several hours. However, the spores can be killed by very high temperature treatments such as (commercial) canning.Commercial heat pasteurization (including vacuum packed pasteurized products and hot smoked products) may not be sufficient to kill all spores and therefore the safety of these products must be based on preventing bacterial growth and toxin production. Refrigeration temperatures combined with salt content and/or acidic conditions will prevent the growth of the bacteria and formation of toxin.The neurotoxins themselves are heat-labile and will be destroyed within minutes at temperatures above 80°C; consequently, only foods improperly processed in which the bacteria or the spores survive, pose a risk.The WHO five keys to safer food serve as the basis for educational programmes to train food handlers and educate the consumers. They are especially important in preventing food poisoning.The five keys are:-       WHO Health topics: Botulism-       WHO Food safety-       WHO Five Keys to Safer Food-       FAO/WHO International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN)-       Santé Publique France. Press conference-       Prefet de la Gironde. Press conference-       ECDC Surveillance Atlas of Infectious Diseases-       The General Directorate of Health (DGS). The Operational Center for Regulation and Response to Health and Social Emergencies (CORRUSS)-       European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Facts about botulism-       Food borne illness. PAHO-       WHO Fact sheets. Food safetyCitable reference: World Health Organization (20 September 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Botulism  in France. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON489Situation at a glanceAs of 11 September 2023, a total of 166 cases of legionellosis, including 23 deaths, have been reported from Poland. Legionellosis, more commonly known as Legionnaires' disease, is a pneumonia-like illness, caused by a bacterium, that varies in severity from mild to a severe illness and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia.This observed increase in confirmed cases, and associated hospitalizations and deaths seen since mid-August, is unusual, considering that the number of cases is higher than the annual number reported in Poland since 2016.Polish health authorities are coordinating cluster investigation activities, active case finding to identify additional cases, and public health activities to prevent transmission and limit the emergence of new cases, through preventive control measures. Since 7 September, no new cases have been reported, although the infection source has not yet been identified. Investigations are still ongoing to find the source of the outbreak.  Most people develop Legionnaires' disease by inhaling the bacteria from water or soil. To date there has been no reported direct human-to-human transmission.Description of the situationOn 18 August 2023, public health authorities in Rzeszów, Poland, announced the detection of a cluster of 158 suspected community-acquired pneumonia cases, including 15 laboratory-confirmed cases of legionellosis among patients admitted to several hospitals in Rzeszów.Between 18 August and 11 September 2023, a total of 166 laboratory-confirmed cases, all hospitalized, and 23 associated deaths (CFR of 14%) have been reported. Most cases, 67% (n=112), were recorded in the city of Rzeszów, 23% (n=38) of cases in Rzeszów county, and 10% (n=16) cases in other locations.Figure 1: Geographic distribution of confirmed Legionellosis cases in Poland between 18 August and 11 September 2023.Preliminary results from an ongoing epidemiological investigation indicate that the first cases developed symptoms on 30 July, while most cases developed symptoms between 12-16 August. Adults between 60 and 90 years are the most affected age group. The most recently reported case has an onset date of 29 August. All 23 related deaths had underlying comorbidities and were between the ages of 53 and 98 (11 females and 12 males).Figure 2: Number of confirmed Legionellosis cases reported in Rzeszow by Epidemic weekLaboratory resultsOnly hospitalized cases are tested for Legionella spp. The majority of the cases were confirmed through urine antigen tests and 11 cases were confirmed through respiratory samples by PCR. Culture and sequencing were not possible as the cases were treated with antibiotics.Between 18 August to 11 September 2023, a total of 379 facility inspections were carried out. A total of 222 samples of hot and cold water were taken and investigations are ongoing. Epidemiology of LegionellosisLegionellosis is an infection caused by Legionella bacteria. The Legionella bacteria can cause a mild illness, Pontiac fever, non-pneumonic form of the disease, and Legionnaires’ disease, a severe pneumonia form of illness that can be fatal. Most people catch Legionnaires' disease by inhaling the bacteria from water or soil.Legionnaires’ disease, the pneumonic form, has an incubation period of 2 to 10 days (but up to 16 days have been recorded in some outbreaks). It is an important cause of community- and hospital-acquired pneumonia, and although uncommon, Legionnaires’ disease may cause outbreaks of public health significance. Initially, symptoms are fever, mild cough, loss of appetite, headache, malaise and lethargy, with some patients also experiencing muscle pain, diarrhoea and confusion. The severity of Legionnaires’ disease ranges from a mild cough to rapidly fatal pneumonia. Untreated Legionnaires’ disease usually worsens during the first week.Mortality from Legionnaires’ disease depends on the severity of the disease, the use of antibiotic treatment, the setting where Legionella was acquired, and whether the patient has underlying conditions, including immunosuppression. The death rate may be as high as 40–80% in untreated immunosuppressed patients and can be reduced to 5–30% through appropriate case management, depending on the severity of the clinical signs and symptoms. Overall, the death rate is usually between 5–10%.Legionellosis varies in severity from a mild febrile illness to a severe and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia and is caused by exposure to Legionella species found in contaminated water and potting mixes. Outbreaks of Legionella have been linked to poorly maintained water systems, particularly cooling towers or evaporative condensers associated with air conditioning and industrial cooling, hot and cold-water systems in public and private buildings, and whirlpool spas.Infection can also occur by aspiration of contaminated water or ice, particularly in susceptible hospital patients. To date, there is no reported human-to-human transmission. Legionnaires' disease requires treatment with antibiotics, and currently, no vaccine is available for Legionnaires' disease.Sporadic outbreaks of Legionnaires' disease have been reported previously in Poland. Between 2017 and 2021, Poland reported between 38 to 74 cases of Legionnaires’ disease annually to the European Surveillance System (TESSy). In 2022, this increased to 111 reported cases.Robust surveillance and response activities are being implemented during the current outbreak, and case numbers have been reduced. Nonetheless, without an identified source of Legionella bacteria, there is a continued risk of developing Legionellosis for people working or living in the affected areas. Older adults, smokers, and people with weakened immune systems are particularly susceptible to the disease.Travel-associated Legionnaires’ disease (TALD) is a frequent phenomenon, with, on average, about 20% of the cases of legionellosis detected in Europe considered to be travel-associated. The outbreak is reported in the south-eastern city of Rzeszów, the main hub for humanitarian aid for Ukraine and the transit hub for international military support for Ukraine; therefore, TALD may be expected in people visiting Rzeszów.According to the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), in 2021, the EU/EEA witnessed the highest annual notification rate of Legionnaires’ disease, with 2.4 cases per 100 000 population. The cause of the increased reported incidence observed during that period in Europe remains unclear. Legionnaires’ disease is a notifiable disease in the EU, and the events are closely followed up through ECDC and European Legionnaires’ Disease Surveillance Network (ELDSNet).WHO recommends the continuation of laboratory analyses, case identification and clinical care, contact tracing, outbreak investigation to identify the source(s), implementation of measures to prevent further infections, and enhancement of Infection, Prevention and Control (IPC) measures. IPC measures in health facilities have been enhanced during the COVID-19 pandemic and should be reinforced to prevent healthcare-associated transmission, including measures to control waterborne pathogens.  WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their healthcare provider. Countries with Legionella cases reported after travel to Poland should notify their regional IHR focal points.WHO advises against applying any travel or trade restrictions on Poland based on the current information available on this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (14 September 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Legionellosis in Poland. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON487Situation at a glanceSince epidemiological week 26, ending 2 July 2023, Nigeria has recorded an unusual increase in cases of diphtheria across several states. From 30 June to 31 August 2023, a total of 5898 suspected cases were reported from 59 Local Government Areas (LGAs) in 11 states. In week 34 (ending 27 August 2023), 234 suspected cases have been reported from 20 LGAs in five states, with one Lab confirmed case1 from the 22 samples collected. Eighteen of these cases were epidemiologically linked 2 and 141 were classified as clinically compatible.Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by the bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae which can be fatal in 5-10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children.WHOs most recent risk assessment of the diphtheria outbreak in Nigeria has maintained the risk as high at the national level, and low at the regional and global levels. Public health measures such as vaccination response, enhanced surveillance for early case detection, case management and risk communication coordinated by the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), in collaboration with WHO and other partners, are being implemented in response to the outbreak.Description of the situationSince the last Disease Outbreak News on diphtheria in Nigeria was published on 27 April 2023, the country has reported suspected cases of diphtheria weekly to WHO. However, between 30 June and 31 August 2023, Nigeria recorded an unusual increase in the number of confirmed diphtheria cases4 (figure 1). From 30 June to 31 August 2023, a total of 5898 suspected cases were reported from 59 LGAs in 11 states across the country. The majority (99.4%) of suspected cases were reported from Kano (1816), Katsina (234), Yobe (158), Bauchi (79), Kaduna (45) and Borno (33). Of the cumulative 8353 suspected cases reported since the outbreak was first reported in 2022, 4717 (56.5%) cases were confirmed4 (lab confirmed1 (169; 3.6%), epidemiologically linked2 (117; 2.5%) and clinical compatibility3 (4431; 93.9%)). While 1857 (22.2%) were discarded as not compatible with diphtheria, 1048 (12.5%) cases are pending classification and 731 (8.8%) cases had unknown diagnosis. The case fatality ratio dropped slightly from 6.7% during the last update to 6.1%. Of the 4717 confirmed cases, 3466 (73.5%) were aged 1 – 14 years, of these 699 were aged 0-4 years, 1505 aged 5-9 years, 1262 (aged 10 – 14 years. More than half of the cases (2656; 56.3%) were females. Only 1074 (22.8%) of the confirmed cases were fully vaccinated against diphtheria, 299 (6.3%) were partially vaccinated. More than half of the cases (2801; 59.4%) were unvaccinated.      Figure 1: Diphtheria cases by year/epi-week in Nigeria, 1 May 2022 – 27 August 2023Definitive diagnosis through laboratory molecular testing identified Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Corynebacterium ulcerans isolates as the species driving this outbreak, particularly C. diphtheria as the major etiologic pathogen associated with the current outbreak. Antibiotic susceptibility tests for 62 isolates of C. diphtheriae have been carried out and the findings revealed that all isolates were resistant to penicillin, and most were resistant to trimethoprim-sulfathiazole and ciprofloxacin, while being susceptible to erythromycin. Thus, erythromycin became the drug of choice in the management of this outbreak (Figure 2).Figure 2 Drug sensitivity results of toxigenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae isolated in Nigeria, May 2022 – July 2023Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and PreventionEpidemiology of diphtheriaDiphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by Corynebacterium diphtheria but also by Corynebacterium ulcerans. It spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups; however, unimmunized children are most at risk.Symptoms often come on gradually, beginning with a sore throat and fever. In severe cases, the bacteria produce a poison (toxin) that causes a thick grey or white patch at the back of throat. This can block the airways, making it hard to breathe or swallow, and also creates a barking cough. The neck may swell in part due to enlarged lymph nodes.Treatment involves administering diphtheria antitoxin (DAT) as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has been effective in reducing the mortality and morbidity from diphtheria dramatically. Diphtheria is fatal in 5-10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. However, in settings with poor access to diphtheria antitoxin, the CFR can be as high as 40%.Nigeria has recorded diphtheria outbreaks in the past, notably in 2011 and 2022. In 2023, a previous outbreak of diphtheria was recorded between January and April 2023 affecting 21 of the 36 states and the FCT. Details of the outbreak have been published on Disease Outbreak News.Diphtheria is a vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by exotoxin-producing Corynebacterium diphtheriae but also by Corynebacterium ulcerans.  Diphtheria is fatal in 5 - 10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. Treatment involves administering DAT as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria reduces the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically.Nigeria is currently facing a second wave of a diphtheria outbreak after a first wave of the outbreak was recorded between epidemiological week 52, 2022 (1 January 2023) and week 20, 2023 (22 May 2023). There is an increase in the affected population with a rise in the number of confirmed cases and related deaths reported in epidemiological weeks 31-33. There is an increased risk of transmission, with clusters and outbreaks reported in newly affected LGAs, with currently 27 LGAs reporting one clinically compatible case in the last three reporting weeks relative to 15 LGAs that had active case in the preceding three weeks.The low national coverage (57%) of the Pentavalent vaccine (Penta 3) administered in routine immunization, and the suboptimal vaccination coverage in the pediatric population—with 43% of the target population unvaccinated—underscores the risk of further spread and the accumulation of a critical mass of susceptible population in the country with sub-optimal herd or population immunity. Vaccine coverage of 80–85% must be maintained to ensure community protection.This emphasizes the urgent need to strengthen diphtheria vaccination coverage nationwide, especially in the most affected states, such as Kano. Additionally, particular attention is necessary for regions experiencing insecurity challenges, like the Northwest, as it hampers vaccine accessibility. Due to insecurity, especially in Northeast Nigeria, vaccination coverage remains suboptimal.DAT supply is currently very constrained and insufficient to respond to current demands, as there is only a limited number of manufacturers and large outbreaks are being reported in different regions of the world.  The NCDC, with support from WHO and other partners have procured 10 050 DAT vials for case management in response to the outbreak.Diphtheria outbreaks are underreported in Nigeria. According to the 2021 Nigeria Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and National Immunization Coverage Survey, the third dose of pentavalent vaccine (Penta3) coverage was 57% in 2021.WHO second Rapid Risk Assessment for diphtheria in Nigeria reassessed and maintained the risk as high at the national level and low at the regional and global levels.The control of diphtheria is based on primary prevention of disease by ensuring high population immunity through vaccination, and secondary prevention of spread by the rapid investigation of close contacts to ensure prompt treatment of those infected.Epidemiological surveillance ensuring early detection of diphtheria outbreaks should be in place in all countries, and all countries should have access to laboratory facilities for reliable identification of toxigenic C. diphtheriae. Adequate quantities of diphtheria antitoxin should be available nationally or regionally for the medical management of cases.Vaccination is key to preventing cases and outbreaks, and adequate clinical management involves administering diphtheria anti-toxin to neutralize the toxin and antibiotics reducing complications and mortality.WHO recommends early reporting and case management of suspected diphtheria cases to initiate the timely treatment of cases, and follow-up of contacts, and ensuring a supply of diphtheria antitoxin.WHO advises implementing the following Infection Prevention & Control measures in health care settings:1) Apply standard precautions, with focus on hand hygiene, personal protective equipment and equipment and environmental cleaning and disinfection droplet and contact precautions (at all times).2) At screening/triage, immediately place patients with symptoms of Upper Respiratory Tract Infection in a separate area until examined, and, if a suspected case, cohorted with patients with the same diagnosis. Keep the isolation area segregated from other patient-care areas.3) Maintain one meter between patients. Keep patient care areas well ventilated.4) Avoid patient movement or transport out of isolation area. If movement is necessary out of isolation area, have patient use a medical mask and cover any wounds/lesions on patient’s body.The case management should be carried out following the WHO guidelines. In addition, high-risk populations such as young children under five years of age, school children, the elderly, close contact with diphtheria cases, and healthcare workers should be vaccinated on a priority basis. A coordinated response and community engagement can support further transmission and control of the ongoing outbreak.Prophylactic antibiotics (penicillin or erythromycin, dependent on drug sensitivity) are indicated for close contacts of confirmed cases for seven days. If the culture is positive for toxigenic Corynebacterium spp., then the contact should be treated as a case with an antibiotic course for two weeks (DAT is not needed for asymptomatic cases or cases without a pseudomembrane).Although travelers do not have a special risk of diphtheria infection, it is recommended that national authorities remind travelers going to areas with diphtheria outbreaks to be appropriately vaccinated in accordance with the national vaccination scheme established in each country prior to travel. A booster dose is recommended if more than five years have passed since their last dose. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1 Lab confirmed (LC): a person with Corynebacterium spp. isolated by culture and positive for toxin   
     production, regardless of symptoms.2 Epidemiologically linked (EL): a person that meets the definition of a suspected case and is linked
    epidemiologically to a laboratory-confirmed case.3 Clinical compatible (CC): a person that meets the definition of a suspected case and lacks both a
  confirmatory laboratory test result and epidemiologic linkage to a laboratory confirmed case.4 Confirmed case = Lab Confirmed + Epidemiologically Linked + Clinical Compatible (Nigeria Centre of Disease Control (NCDC): Diphtheria Situation report, Serial Number 03, Data as of Epi-week 31 2023: An Update on Diphtheria Outbreak in Nigeria)Citable reference: World Health Organization (13 September 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Diphtheria in Nigeria. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON485  Situation at a glanceOn 2 September 2023, the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport of the Netherlands notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1) variant (v) virus in the province of North Brabant, Netherlands. This is the first human infection caused by influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in the Netherlands in 2023.Worldwide sporadic human cases of influenza A(H1N1)v have been reported previously, including from the Netherlands. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR,2005), a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO.This case was picked up as part of routine surveillance of respiratory illnesses. Based on the available information, there is no clear indication of the source of infection, and no direct contact with pigs was reported. As of 7 September, there were no symptomatic contacts of this case and no further detections have been reported in routine surveillance. All five close contacts were followed for 10 days- the maximum incubation period and none developed symptoms. Thus, there was no evidence of person-to-person transmission and the case is considered as a sporadic human case of influenza A(H1N1)v. The likelihood of community-level spread among humans and/or international disease spread through humans is considered as low.Description of the caseOn 2 September 2023, WHO was notified of a confirmed human infection with a swine influenza A(H1N1)v virus, in Netherlands through the European Commission's confidential Early Warning and Response System (EWRS).The case is an adult from the province of North Brabant with no underlying medical conditions and no history of occupational exposure to animals. On 20 August 2023, the patient developed fatigue and general malaise and the following day developed an acute respiratory infection with onset of chills, sneeze, cough, headache, and generalized weakness, followed by fever on 22 August.On 21 August 2023, the patient reported symptoms as part of participatory surveillance[1] of acute respiratory infections and submitted a self-collected combined nose and throat swab specimen to the laboratory. On 22 August 2023, the specimen was forwarded at the Dutch National Influenza Centre location at the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) where it tested positive for influenza A virus and negative for A(H1N1)pdm09, both tests included on a commercial 24 pathogen multiplex nucleic acid amplification assay on 23 August.Further routine subtyping was performed on 24 and 25 August with RT-qPCR assays. Tests for seasonal influenza viruses and H5 viruses were negative. In addition, a laboratory-developed test (LDT) and another commercial assay for generic influenza A virus detection confirmed the presence of type A influenza virus in the specimen.Routine whole genome sequencing using nanopore technique and virus isolation were started on 28 August. On 30 August, sequencing results revealed that the virus, A/Netherlands/10534/2023, is an A(H1N1)v Eurasian avian-like clade 1C.2.2 swine influenza virus. The HA genome segment clustered closely with recent clade 1C.2.2 swine influenza viruses from 2022 and 2023 from the Netherlands.[2] It clustered less closely with previous clade 1C.2.2 A(H1N1)v (from 2019) and A(H1N2)v (from 2020) viruses from the Netherlands. Phenotypically, the virus is sensitive to neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir.The virus isolate will be shared with the WHO Collaborating Centre in London, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) avian and swine influenza reference laboratory at the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA), UK. The sequences are available from the GISAID database under accession EPI_ISL_18168180.As of 13 September, the person is recovered. Investigations reported that the individual did not work at a pig farm or other business involving pigs and does not work in health care. Therefore, there is no clear indication of the source of infection. Epidemiology of the diseaseInfluenza A(H1) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. H1N1, H1N2 and H3N2 are major subtypes of swine influenza A viruses in pigs and occasionally infect humans, usually after direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments.Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal.Sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H1N1)v and A(H1N2)v viruses have been reported in the Netherlands previously, and there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.This is the first human infection caused by swine influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in 2023 in the Netherlands, and the third human infection over the past five years. Since 1986, nine variant cases have been documented in humans in the Netherlands.National authorities monitored the case and all close contacts. As of 7 September, none of the five close contacts have reported any symptoms. Further antigenic virus characterization is ongoing. The Zoonosis Centre and veterinarians conducted an investigation, but no possible source of infection was identified.  Therefore, no animal monitoring or testing was performed.Few influenza viruses are currently detected in the Netherlands, and none of these characterized are variant swine influenza A viruses, apart from the current case reported.The (online) participatory surveillance; part of www.influenzanet.info is focused on syndromic surveillance among those who may not seek care for their illness and includes a self-test study with over 17 000 participants. Participants are asked each week whether they have symptoms. From those who report a sore throat, runny nose, cough, or dyspnoea up to 200 persons are invited each week to send in a combined nose and throat swab for centralized testing at the RIVM. Over 5500 specimens have been tested since October 2022.[3]Most human cases result from exposure to swine influenza viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Occasionally, the source of exposure has remained unidentified.As these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations worldwide, further human cases following direct or indirect contact with infected swine can be expected.Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans. There has been limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. In this event, there was no human-to-human transmission resulting in symptomatic disease detected and no further detections have been reported in routine surveillance.The risk of detecting additional cases associated with this event appears to be low.If needed, the risk assessment will be reviewed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.Surveillance:Notification and investigation: Travel and trade:Prevention measures:  Generally, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. Although the seasonal influenza vaccine does not protect against swine viruses, WHO recommends seasonal influenza vaccination to avoid severe disease from infection with the seasonal influenza virus.[1] The purpose of participatory surveillance is to determine the incidence of acute respiratory infections in the community. Participants can sign up to participate in self-test for SARS-CoV-2 to get insight in the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 in the community and the circulation of variants. A subset is asked for self-swabbing for other respiratory viruses and some respiratory bacteria, to get insight in the causes of reported acute respiratory infection symptoms in patients that do not consult a GP or hospital for their symptoms.[2] https://www.rivm.nl/zoonosen/surveillance-landbouwhuisdieren/surveillance-varkensinfluenza[3] https://www.rivm.nl/griep-griepprik/feiten-en-cijfers#irzelftestCitable reference: World Health Organization (13 September 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Influenza A(H1N1) variant virus - the Netherlands. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON486Situation at a glanceFrom 13 September 2022 to 12 August 2023, three laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), including two deaths, were reported to WHO by the Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA).  Close contacts for the three cases were followed up by the Ministry of Health, and no secondary cases were identified. The notification of these cases reiterates the need for global awareness of MERS-CoV as the disease continues to pose a threat in countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedary camels, including those in the Middle East. Description of situationBetween 13 September 2022 to 12 August 2023, the Ministry of Health of KSA reported three additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), with two associated deaths. The cases were reported from Riyadh, Asser, and Makkah Al Mukarramah regions (Figure 1). Laboratory confirmation of the cases was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).All three cases were non-health-care workers, who presented with fever, cough, and shortness of breath, and had comorbidities. Of the three cases, two had a history of contact with dromedary camels and all three cases had a history of consumption of raw camel milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. All three cases were male, and aged 42, 83, and 85 years respectively (Table 1).Since the first report of MERS-CoV in KSA in 2012, human infections have been reported from 27 countries, in all six WHO regions. Of the reported 2605 cases, the majority of MERS-CoV cases (2196; 84%) have been reported from KSA, including these newly reported cases. Of the 937 deaths reported from 27 countries, a total of 856 (91%) deaths have been reported from KSA, including the newly reported deaths (Figure 2).Figure 1. Geographical distribution of MERS-CoV cases between 13 September 2022 and 12 August by city and region, KSA (n=3).Table 1. MERS-CoV cases reported by KSA between 13 September 2022 and 12 August 2023Figure 2:  Epidemic curve of MERS-CoV cases and deaths reported in KSA between 2012 and 12 August 2023Epidemiology of MERS-CoVMiddle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection caused by the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Approximately 36% of patients with MERS have died, though this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems, and the case fatality ratio (CFR) is calculated based only on laboratory-confirmed cases.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels, which are the natural host and zoonotic source of the virus. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings and outside of the healthcare setting, there has been limited human-to-human transmission.MERS-CoV infections range from showing no symptoms (asymptomatic) or mild respiratory symptoms, to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS disease is fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems, and those with comorbidities or chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes.No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and therapeutics are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms.Follow-up of the close contacts was conducted for all three cases, and no secondary cases were identified.For the two cases reporting contact with camels, the Ministry of Agriculture was informed, and an investigation of camels was conducted. There are no treatments available for MERS-CoV in animals. The identified positive camels were isolated until RT-PCR testing was negative.From 13 September 2012 to 12 August 2023, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO was 2605, with 937 (CFR 36%) associated deaths. The majority of these cases occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula, including 2196 cases with 856 related deaths (CFR 39%) in KSA. There has been one large outbreak outside of the Middle East, in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in the Republic of Korea and 1 in China) and 38 deaths were reported. The index case in that outbreak had a travel history to the Middle East. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR (2005) or directly by Ministries of Health. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected Member States. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of raw camel milk), or in a healthcare setting. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.  The number of MERS cases reported to WHO has substantially declined since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is likely the result of epidemiological surveillance activities for COVID-19 being prioritized and the similar clinical picture of both diseases, resulting in reduced testing and detection of MERS CoV cases. The Ministry of Health of KSA is working to improve testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, measures taken during the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission (e.g., mask wearing, hand hygiene, physical distancing, improving ventilation of indoor spaces, respiratory etiquette, stay-at-home orders, reduced mobility) also likely reduced opportunities for onward human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review and investigate any unusual patterns. Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases, and delays in implementing infection, prevention, and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in healthcare facilities. Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures or in settings where aerosol generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care setting and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV. MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus may be circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk, camel urine or eating meat that has not been thoroughly cooked.  The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk and meat, carries a high risk of infection from pathogens that may cause disease in humans. Animal products that are processed appropriately through cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption. Foods that have gone through these processes should be handled with care to avoid cross contamination with uncooked/unsafe foods. Camel meat and camel milk are nutritious products that can continue to be consumed after cooking, pasteurization or other thermal treatments.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (29 August 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) – Saudi Arabia. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON484Situation at a glanceOn 12 August 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Chile notified WHO of a confirmed case of measles in the Metropolitan Region. The case had history of travel to Georgia, where measles is endemic, and Armenia, where measles has been eliminated, and returning to Chile via Qatar and Brazil. To date no further cases related to this importation have been detected.This is the first measles case reported in Chile since 2020. As soon as the case was notified, the local and national authorities implemented control measures, including case isolation and an epidemiological investigation to identify the exposed contacts and refer them for vaccination, and reinforced surveillance activities in the public and private health network.Measles is a highly contagious acute viral disease but can be prevented by immunization. Chile interrupted local transmission of measles in 1993. Imported cases are expected, and the susceptibility of contacts determines the spread of the disease.Description of the situationOn 12 August 2023, IHR National Focal Point of Chile notified WHO of a confirmed case of measles in the Metropolitan Region. The patient is a 42-year-old male from Chile with a history of travel to Armenia and Georgia (between 16 July and 26 July, returning to Chile on 26 July via Qatar and Brazil), and no history of vaccination against measles. This is the first imported case of measles reported in Chile since 2020.On 7 August 2023, the patient presented with symptoms consistent with chills, myalgias, fever and malaise, twelve days after his return to Chile. On 8 August 2023, the case developed a rash (13 days after return) and on 9 and 10 August, he sought medical attention in two different health care facilities.On 10 August 2023, serum and urine samples were collected and tested reactive for measles by IgM and PCR at a private clinic laboratory. On 11 August 2023, the samples were sent to the Public Health Institute of Chile, the national reference laboratory, where they tested reactive for measles by IgM and PCR on the same day. The patient did not require hospitalization, and as of 17 August, his progress has been favourable.The patient has been in contact with about a thousand people through exposures at home, work, school, in waiting rooms of health facilities and others. As of 17 August, the contacts are under follow-up, and 325 contacts have received a dose of MMR, or standard immunoglobulin (for special groups), in the context of this outbreak, other contacts have accredited vaccination (National Immunization Registry- RNI per its acronym in Spanish or vaccination certificate) of two doses against measles, and the rest are still in the referral process to complete the missing doses.In Chile, the current vaccination scheme considers the administration of two doses of measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine: the first dose at 12 months of life and the second dose at 36 months of age. Official measles immunization coverage in Chile with the first dose for MMR vaccine was 93.9% in 2022 and was 52.9% as of epidemiological week 26 of 2023, being below the percentage of sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% recommended by the WHO. According to WHO/UNICEF National Immunization Coverage (WEUNIC) estimates, Chile's vaccination coverage with two doses of measles-containing vaccine (MCV2) was less than 60% over the past two years. In addition, within this national coverage, there are subnational variations (rural and peripheral urban areas) which could include pockets of unvaccinated people in all age groups.Epidemiology of MeaslesMeasles is a highly contagious acute viral disease, which affects susceptible individuals of all ages and remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally. The mode of transmission is airborne or via droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat of infected persons.Early symptoms of measles are fever (as high as 40°C) and malaise, cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis, followed by a rash with both raised and flat areas (maculopapular rash). The rash usually appears 14 days after exposure and spreads from the head to the trunk to the lower extremities. A patient is infectious from four days before up to four days after the appearance of the rash. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.Measles is usually a mild or moderately severe disease. However, measles can lead to complications such as pneumonia, inflammation of brain (encephalitis), and death. Postinfectious encephalitis can occur in about one in every 1000 reported cases of measles. About two or three deaths may occur for every 1000 reported cases of measles.Among malnourished children and immunocompromised people including people with HIV, cancer and treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhoea, ear infection, and pneumonia.Measles can be prevented by immunization. In countries with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.The following public health measures were implemented by local and national health authorities:Additionally, during the second semester of this year, the updated strategy for students from 1st to 8th grade will be implemented in Chile [1].Measles remains one of the leading causes of death among young children worldwide. It is highly contagious, with 90% of non-immune people exposed to an infectious individual estimated to contract the disease.  In 2016, the Region of the Americas was the first Region of WHO to be declared free of endemic transmission of measles viruses by the International Expert Committee (IEC) for Documenting and Verifying Measles, Rubella and the Congenital Rubella Syndrome in the Americas. Nevertheless, maintaining the Region free of measles is an ongoing challenge due to the permanent risk of importation and reintroduction of the virus. This case corresponds to a susceptible cohort of people born between 1971 and 1981 who were not immunized with two doses of MMR or did not previously present with the disease.During the COVID-19 pandemic, there might be a risk of disruption to routine immunization activities due to both COVID-19 related burden on the health system and decreased demand for vaccination because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services even for a short time can result in increased numbers of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs) such as measles.Measles anywhere is a problem everywhere because it spreads so easily. WHO recommends that countries in all regions continue to make progress towards achieving measles elimination in line with each of the endorsed Regional Goals of all WHO regions to achieve measles elimination, as well as the global strategy under IA2030, the Measles and Rubella Strategic Framework.WHO recommends strengthening the efforts to implement the "Plan of Action for the Sustainability of Measles, Rubella, and Congenital Rubella Syndrome Elimination in the Americas 2018-2023", with its four strategic sections: 1) guarantee universal access to vaccination services; 2) strengthen the capacity of epidemiological surveillance systems for measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome; 3) develop the national operational capacity to maintain the elimination status; 4) establish standard mechanisms for rapid response to imported measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome cases to prevent the re-establishment of endemic transmission in the countries.WHO recommends strengthening epidemiological surveillance in high-traffic border areas to rapidly detect and respond to highly suspected measles cases. Providing a rapid response to imported measles cases to avoid the establishment of endemic transmission through the activation of rapid response teams trained for this purpose and by implementing national rapid response protocols when there are imported cases. Once a rapid response team has been activated, continued coordination between the national, sub-national and local levels must be ensured, with permanent communication channels between all levels. During outbreaks, it is recommended to establish adequate hospital case management to avoid nosocomial transmission, with appropriate referral of patients to isolation rooms (for any level of care) and avoiding contact with other patients in waiting rooms and/or other hospital rooms.WHO recommends vaccination of at-risk populations without proof of vaccination or immunity against measles and rubella, such as health care workers, persons working in tourism and transportation (hotels, airports, border crossings, mass transportation, and others), and international travellers who are visiting measles endemic countries. Implementing a plan to immunize migrant populations in high-traffic border areas, prioritizing those considered at-risk, including both migrants and residents, in these municipalities increases vaccination coverage to increase population immunity.In all settings consideration should be given to providing susceptible contacts with post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP), including a dose of MCV or normal human immunoglobulin (NHIG) (if available) for those at risk and in whom the vaccine is contraindicated. In well-resourced settings, MCV should be provided to susceptible contacts within 3 days. For contacts for whom vaccination is contraindicated or is not possible within 3 days post-exposure, consideration can be given to providing NHIG up to 6 days post-exposure. Infants, pregnant women, and the immunocompromised should be prioritized.WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV vaccine in all municipalities and strengthening integrated epidemiological surveillance of measles and rubella to achieve timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities.WHO recommends maintaining a stock of the measles-rubella (MR)and/or measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine, and syringes/supplies for control actions of imported cases. Facilitating the access to vaccination services according to the national scheme to foreigners or people from the same country who perform temporary activities in countries with ongoing outbreaks; displaced populations; indigenous populations, or other vulnerable populations.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Chile based on the information available on the current outbreak.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (23 August 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles - Chile. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON483[1] https://vacunas.minsal.cl/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/2660-ORD-Informa-puesta-al-dia-vacuna-SRP-escolares-1%C2%B0-a-8%C2%B0-basico44.pdfSituation at a glance:On 4 August 2023, the United States International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point informed PAHO/WHO of a human infection with a novel influenza A(H1N2) variant virus identified in the State of Michigan. This was confirmed by Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction at the United States (US) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on August 2.The case was not hospitalized and is recovering from the illness. Investigations by local public health officials identified swine exposure by the patient at an agricultural fair.Additional public health response efforts including enhanced surveillance for cases is undergoing. Given the potential impact on public health, human infections with these viruses need to be monitored closely. In this event, there was no reported evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission, the illness was mild and no further influenza variant virus transmission in the community has been identified.Description of the case:On 4 August 2023, the United States IHR National Focal Point informed PAHO/WHO of a human infection with a novel influenza A(H1N2) variant virus identified in the State of Michigan and confirmed by the US CDC. According to the report, the case is under 18 years old, with no comorbidities, resident in the State of Michigan, who developed respiratory illness on 29 July 2023. The case presented with fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches, headache, shortness of breath, diarrhea, nausea, dizziness, and lethargy. On 29 July, the case sought medical care at an emergency department, and an upper respiratory tract specimen was collected on 30 July. The specimen tested positive for influenza A virus on the same day. On 1 August, the patient received influenza antiviral treatment (Oseltamivir).On 31 July, the specimen was tested at the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (MDHHS), and RT-PCR results were positive for influenza A virus but lacked reactivity with diagnostic tests for contemporary human influenza viruses representing either (H1) pdm09 or (H3) subtypes. The specimen was then sent to the US CDC for further testing and received on 2 August. On the same day, RT-PCR analysis of the specimen indicated an influenza A(H1N2) variant (v) virus. The virus was isolated and subsequent analysis including genetic sequencing is underway.The case was not hospitalized. Investigation by local public health officials identified swine exposure by the patient at an agricultural fair, that took place between 23 and 29 July, within 10 days prior to illness onset. Additional investigation did not identify respiratory illness in any of the patient’s close contacts or household contacts. No additional cases were identified related to this agriculture fair. No person-to-person transmission of influenza A(H1N2)v virus associated with this case has been identified. No additional cases of human infection with A(H1N2)v virus have been identified as of 10 August 2023.This is the first influenza A(H1N2)v virus infection identified in the United States this year. Since 2005, there have been 512 influenza A variant virus infections (all subtypes), including 37 (human infections with influenza A (H1N2)v viruses reported in the United States.Epidemiology of the disease:Swine influenza A(H1N2) viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Influenza A viruses that normally circulate in swine are called “variant” influenza viruses when isolated from humans.1 Human infections are usually due to direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments. There may be important antigenic and genetic differences between seasonal influenza viruses that circulate worldwide in the human population and influenza viruses that normally circulate in swine. Close monitoring is needed to early identify changes in the virus and/or its transmission to humans.2Non-seasonal or zoonotic influenza viruses infecting humans may cause disease ranging from mild conjunctivitis to severe pneumonia and even death; usually, these human infections of zoonotic influenza are acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Since 2005, 37 human infections with influenza A(H1N2)v virus, including this one, have been reported in the United States.The public health response efforts led by local officials included enhanced surveillance for cases. The county health department conducted active case finding by reaching out to fair exhibitors and their families to ascertain additional illnesses.  In addition, local providers were notified to watch for respiratory illness in persons who had attended the fair or had recent contact with swine.Swine influenza A viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic characteristics of these viruses differ. When an influenza A virus that normally circulates in swine (but not people) is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. Most human cases are the result of exposure to swine influenza A viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations around the world, further human cases can be expected.According to the IHR, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact. A novel influenza A virus is considered to have the potential to cause a pandemic if (1) the virus has demonstrated the capacity to infect and transmit efficiently among humans, and (2) differs from currently circulating seasonal human influenza viruses (i.e., A/H1 or A/H3), circulating widely in the human population such that the hemagglutinin (HA) gene (or protein) is not a mutated form of those; and (3) the population has little to no immunity against it.To date, only sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H3N2), A(H1N1) and A(H1N2) variant viruses have been reported in the United States, and there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission. Human infections with influenza variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease. Given the potential impact on public health, human infections with these viruses need to be monitored closely. In this event, there was no reported evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission, the illness was mild and no further influenza variant virus transmission in the community has been identified.There has been some limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza A viruses, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. The risk assessment will be reviewed if needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.Influenza A viruses that infect pigs are different from human influenza A viruses. Currently, there is no vaccine for Influenza A(H1N2)v infection licensed for use in humans. Thus, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs.This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of seasonal influenza.WHO does not advise special traveller screening at points of entry or restrictions with regards to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. For recommendations on safe trade in animals and related products from countries affected by these influenza viruses, refer to WOAH guidance. The public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes, including wild animals, and should report dead wild birds and mammals or request their removal by contacting local wildlife or veterinary authorities.WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal excreta. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. All individuals should follow good food safety and hygiene practices. Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virologic, epidemiologic and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment. Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighbouring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. Collaboration between the animal and human health sectors is essential. As the extent of influenza viruses circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiologic and virologic surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should continue systematically. Guidance on investigation of non-seasonal influenza and other emerging acute respiratory diseases has been published on the WHO website here.Vigilance for the emergence of novel influenza viruses of pandemic potential should be maintained. WHO has developed practical guidance for integrated surveillance in the context of the cocirculation of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses. The guidance is available here.All human infections caused by a new subtype of influenza virus are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. It is critical that these influenza viruses from animals or from people are fully characterized in appropriate animal or human health influenza reference laboratories. Under WHO’s Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, Member States are expected to share Influenza Viruses with Pandemic Potential (IVPP) on a regular and timely basis with the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), a WHO-coordinated network of public health laboratories. The viruses are used by the public health laboratories to assess the risk of pandemic influenza and to develop relevant candidate vaccine viruses. [1] Standardization of terminology for the influenza virus variants infecting humans: Update. Available at: https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/influenza/global-influenza-surveillance-and-response-system/nomenclature/standardization_of_terminology_influenza_virus_variants_update.pdf[2] Case definitions for the four diseases requiring notification in all circumstances under the International Health Regulations (2005). Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/241283/WER8407_52-56.PDFCitable reference: World Health Organization (11 August 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Influenza A(H1N2) in the United States of America. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON482Situation at a glance From 1 January to 7 August 2023, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of Bangladesh reported a total of 69 483 laboratory-confirmed dengue cases and 327 related deaths, with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 0.47%. Of these, 63% of cases and 62% of the deaths were reported in the month of July 2023. Although dengue is endemic in Bangladesh, the current dengue surge is unusual in terms of seasonality and the early sharp increase in comparison to previous years, where the surge started around -late June. The CFR so far this year is relatively high compared to previous years for the full-year period. The pre-monsoon Aedes survey shows that the density of mosquitoes, and the number of potential hotspots is at the highest level in the past five years.The higher incidence of dengue is taking place in the context of an unusual episodic amount of rainfall, combined with high temperatures and high humidity, which have resulted in an increased mosquito population throughout Bangladesh. Description of the outbreakBetween 1 January and 7 August 2023, a total of 69 483 dengue cases including 327 related deaths (case fatality rate = 0.47%) were reported by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW). As of 30 June 2023, a total of 7978 cases and 47 deaths were reported, however, the cases started surging rapidly from late June and in the month of July alone 63% of cases (n=43 854) and 62% of deaths (n= 204) were reported. The number of cases and deaths are higher compared to similar periods in the past five years (Figure 1). Dengue cases started to rise in May 2023 and have been continuing since then, and the peak is unlikely to have been reached. The reported number of dengue cases this year is the highest compared to the same periods recorded since 2000.The cases are reported from all 64 districts in the country.  Cases in Dhaka division started to increase in epidemic week 17 (23-29 April 2023) and in all eight divisions since epidemic week 26 (25 June to 1 July 2023).  The most affected area in the Dhaka division is Dhaka city corporation, accounting for 52.8% of cases and 78.9% of deaths. Other affected divisions include Chattogram division (13.2% of cases and 9.2% of deaths), Dhaka division excluding Dhaka city (11.6% of cases and 2.8% of deaths), and Barisal division (10.5% of cases and 4.3% of deaths). The Sylhet division has the lowest number of cases (560) and no deaths reported so far.As of 7 August 2023, the reported CFR is 0.47%, which is higher compared to previous years (table 1). On further analysis, the overall CFR is higher in females than in males (0.72% v 0.32%) with females having four times higher CFR than males among those aged 21-40 years (0.71% vs 0.18%). The older age group recorded a higher CFR compared to the younger age group (1.87% in the age group over 60 years compared to 0.74% in the age group between 41 to 60 years and 0.34% in those aged 40 years and below).DENV2 was the predominant circulating serotype in Bangladesh until 2018, when it was replaced by DENV3 as the predominant serotype since 2019.  However, DENV2 has been identified as the primary circulating serotype in this outbreak, and this may result in more severe dengue infections and hospitalizations as a result of a second infection with a heterologous serotype. Of the 66 serotyped samples in the month of June 2023, DENV2 (51.5%) and DENV3 (43.9%) were identified as the circulating serotypes.Figure 1. Number of dengue cases (A) and deaths (B) reported by epidemic week from 2018 to 2023 [as of 5 August (epidemiological week 31) 2023] Table 1: Dengue cases, deaths, and case fatality rate in Bangladesh for 2018, 2019, 2021, 2022 and 2023  Data source: DGHS (*data for 2020 is limited due to COVID-19) Epidemiology of dengueDengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections with a different serotype put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild flu-like illness and over 80% of cases are asymptomatic.There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, the timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to lower case fatality rates to less than 1%.Dengue was first recorded in the 1960s in Bangladesh (then known as East Pakistan) and was known as “Dacca fever”. Since 2010 cases of dengue appear to coincide with the rainy season from May to September and higher temperatures. Bangladesh’s climate conditions are becoming more favorable for the transmission of dengue and other vector-borne diseases including malaria and chikungunya virus due to excessive rainfall, waterlogging, flooding, rise in temperature and the unusual shifts in the country’s traditional seasons. The high number of reported cases has put pressure on the health systems and the Directorate General of Health Services has taken the following actions:CoordinationHealth system strengthening for case management:Strengthening surveillance: Risk communication and community engagement:Laboratory:Vector control activities: Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh with recurrent outbreaks and is one of the major public health concerns in Bangladesh. Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality.All four serotypes of the dengue virus have been reported in Bangladesh with the predominance of DENV 1 and DENV2 until 2016. Since 2019, when the largest dengue outbreak was reported, DENV3 has been the predominant serotype, while this year DENV2 has become the predominant serotype.  There is no specific treatment for cases and clinical management is based on supportive therapy however, the early detection of infection and appropriate clinical management of patients can reduce the severity of disease and mortality The prevention and control of dengue depends on vector control. A dengue vaccine has not been approved in Bangladesh. The dengue risk at the national level is assessed as ‘High’ due to the ongoing rapidly increasing number of cases and deaths with the peak not yet reached, the high CFR compared to the previous years and the increasing geographical distribution of cases. In addition, DENV2 has been identified as the predominant circulating serotype, following four years of DENV3 predominating which may result in higher numbers of severe cases as a result of a second infection with a heterologous serotype. Furthermore, there is some pressure on the healthcare capacity due to the very high number of admissions for dengue; high vector density; and an anticipated prolonged monsoon.Bangladesh has three international airports, three seaports and twenty-three land ports. Bangladesh shares 94% of its land border with India with frequent population movement across the land crossing, however, dengue is already endemic in India including the eastern Indian states which share land borders with Bangladesh and where Aedes mosquitoes breed and circulate. Climate change along with heavy rains in neighboring countries increase the likelihood of vector-borne disease transmission. Due to social and economic factors, many people migrate from Bangladesh to other countries thereby increasing the risk of international disease spread. Bangladesh receives a large volume of international tourists, and the possibility of travellers acquiring the disease and contributing to its further spread outside the country cannot be ruled out. The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. Aedes species mosquitoes can become infected with the virus after biting DENV-infected individuals and then pass the virus onto other individuals within the vicinity. This cycle, therefore, makes the infective mosquito capable of spreading the dengue virus within households and in the neighbourhood, leading to clusters of cases. The prevention and control of the DENV, virus that causes dengue, depends on effective vector control. Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact such as the place of residence, workplaces, schools, and hospitals. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including Aedes species, the vector of dengue. IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e. environmental management and source reduction, especially of water storage practices, and include covering, draining and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis; larvicide in non-potable water using WHO-prequalified larvicides at correct dosages, distribution of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) for fever/dengue inpatients to contain spread of virus from health facilities, as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Indoor space spraying (fogging) is another approach for rapid containment of dengue infected mosquitoes but may be challenging to deliver in densely populated areas such as camps. Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the topical application of repellents to exposed skin or treatment of clothing, and the use of long sleeves shirts and pants. Additionally, in indoors protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products, or mosquito coils during the day. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping. Since Aedes mosquitoes (the primary vector for transmission) are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day. Entomological surveillance should be undertaken to assess the breeding potential of Aedes mosquitoes in containers as well as to monitor insecticide resistance to help select most effective insecticide-based interventions. Insecticide resistance test kits produced by a WHO-coordinated facility in Universiti Sains Malaysia should be procured.There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection and access to appropriate healthcare for case management can reduce mortality. Rapid detection of severe dengue cases and timely referrals to tertiary hospitals can reduce mortality. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated for the strengthening of a sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of dengue virus. WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to Bangladesh based on the information available for this event. Citable reference: World Health Organization (11 August 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue in Bangladesh. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON481Situation at a glanceOn 11 July 2023, WHO received an official report regarding the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in two acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases and two asymptomatic healthy children community contacts from Hagadera refugee camp, in Kenya, the second largest refugee camp in the world with over 100 000 refugees.The genetic sequencing analyses showed that all four isolates are genetically linked to the cVDPV2 circulating in Banadir, Somalia.WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the overcrowded living conditions in the refugee camp, high rate of malnutrition, poor water and sanitation facilities, and frequent population movements with Somalia.Description of the situationOn 11 July 2023, WHO received an official report regarding the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Kenya. The detection was reported from Hagadera refugee camp which is the second largest refugee camp in the world with over 100 000 refugees.Four genetically-linked cVDPV2 were isolated in samples from two acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases, and two asymptomatic healthy children community contacts, from Fafi district, Garissa county. The cases and community contacts are all from Hagadera refugee camp, associated with frequent population movement with neighboring Somalia.The first case is a 2-year-old male, vaccinated with three doses of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV), with no travel history, who developed paralysis on 26 May, and stool samples were collected on 1 June and 2 June. The second case is a 2.7-year-old female with a travel history to Afmadhow, Lower Juba, southern Somalia, vaccinated with three doses of oral polio vaccine (OPV) who developed paralysis on 27 May, and stool samples were collected on 2 June and 3 June 2023.A community contact, a 2-year-old male asymptomatic healthy child was identified with a stool sample collected on 25 May 2023. The child has zero-dose vaccination. A second asymptomatic healthy child community contact was also identified from Hagadera refugee camp with the same emerging strain from Somalia and case investigation is being conducted.The genetic sequencing analyses showed that all four isolates have undergone between 65 and 73 nucleotide changes from Sabin and are genetically linked to the cVDPV2 circulating in Banadir, Somalia.According to the WHO UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, oral polio vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV) was 91% in Kenya in 2021. However, the coverage in Hagadera camp is 77% for both OPV3 and IPV as of May 2023.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2).The MoH established the Kenya Expanded Programme on Immunization (KEPI) for six priority diseases including polio in 1980.Inactivated polio vaccine was introduced in 2015. Although the country did not have a wild poliovirus outbreak in 2014, Kenya, together with other Horn of African countries remained at risk of imported wild poliovirus from neighbouring Somalia due to the 2013 outbreak that continued until July 2014.  After this polio outbreak in 2013, the country initiated environmental surveillance for polioviruses in an effort to supplement AFP surveillance, which is the benchmark for surveillance of wild poliovirus.WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the overcrowded living conditions in the refugee camp, high rate of malnutrition, poor water and sanitation facilities, mass and frequent population movements with Somalia, influx of new arrivals to the camp, late identification of the newly arrived children, high prevalence of zero dose children among the newly arriving children from middle and lower Juba Somalia, and sub-optimal surveillance performance.WHO considers the risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 of this strain to be high, particularly across other areas of the Horn of Africa, due to the low population immunity, the use of trivalent OPV (tOPV) in Somalia, suboptimal surveillance, and inadequate routine immunization levels in some areas, and large-scale population movements.In all instances, the continued spread of existing outbreaks including the genetically linked cVDPV2 cases detected in Kenya which is genetically linked to the one circulating in Somalia as well as the emergence of new outbreaks of cVDPV2 indicates significant gaps in routine immunization coverage and inadequate outbreak response vaccination. The risk of further spread of such strains, or the emergence of new strains, is exacerbated by decreased immunization rates related to disruption in routine and campaign immunization during the COVID-19 pandemic.It is important that all countries, particularly those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance to rapidly detect any new virus importation and facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level, including vulnerable populations such as Refugees/Returnees to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis.Citable reference: World Health Organization (28 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Kenya. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON479Situation at a glanceOn 4 July 2023, the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country. The virus was isolated from a case of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in the Rukwa region, southwestern Tanzania bordering Lake Tanganyika to the west and Zambia to the south. Gene sequencing of the isolated virus has indicated close linkage with the cVDPV2 circulating in South Kivu, Demographic Republic of the Congo (DRC).1The public health authorities of the Ministry of Health are conducting further field investigations including strengthening the AFP surveillance for the detection of additional AFP cases and subnational level immunity gap analysis to identify potential un-or under-immunized populations and/or areas to guide public health response activities.WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the sub-optimal surveillance performance in some districts, sub-optimal vaccination coverage resulting in low population immunity and the ongoing population movement across neighbouring countries.Description of the situationOn 4 July 2023, the health authorities of the United Republic of Tanzania confirmed and notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country.  The case is a child under two years old and has received three doses of bOPV vaccine, one dose of IPV vaccine for routine immunization and two doses of bOPV during supplementary immunization activities (SIA) in 2022 with no documented travel history. The child was initially reported as a case of AFP from Rukwa region of southwestern Tanzania who experienced paralysis in late May 2023.Two stool samples were collected from the case on 30 and 31 May 2023 respectively and were confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 30 June 2023. Gene sequencing results showed that the isolated virus has undergone 15 nucleotide changes and is closely related to the strain circulating in South Kivu, Demographic Republic of the Congo in 2023.1Since 2022, Tanzania has been actively participating in a multi-country outbreak response across south-east Africa, in response to detection of different strains of poliovirus in the sub-region, including boosting immunity levels through mass vaccination campaigns and strengthening subnational surveillance capacity.According to the WHO-UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, the oral polio vaccine third dose (OPV3) and the inactivated polio vaccine first dose (IPV1) was 88% in 2022 in Tanzania.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2).The last recorded case of indigenous wild poliovirus (WPV) in Tanzania was in 1996, and the cVPDV2 case in 2023 is the first case detected in the country.WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the sub-optimal AFP surveillance performance in some districts, the sub-optimal vaccination coverage resulting in low population immunity and more susceptible children, and the ongoing population movement across neighbouring countries.WHO considers this event to be of high risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 of this strain across the region, particularly across other areas of central and south-east Africa, due to the low population immunity and inadequate routine immunization levels in some areas, and large-scale population movements. In all instances, the continued spread of existing outbreaks as well as the emergence of new outbreaks of cVDPV2 point to gaps in routine immunization coverage and inadequate outbreak response vaccination.While new WHO and UNICEF data show promising signs of immunization services rebounding in some countries, coverage still falls short of pre-pandemic levels putting children at risk from disease outbreaks, particularly in low-income countries.  In response to these latest published data, the members of the Immunization Agenda 2030 Partnership Council called for further strengthened efforts (Immunization Agenda 2030) for immunization recovery.It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis.1GPEI Statement on cVDPV2 detections in Burundi and Democratic Republic of the Congo: https://polioeradication.org/news-post/gpei-statement-on-cvdpv2-detections-in-burundi-and-democratic-republic-of-the-congo/Citable reference: World Health Organization (28 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON480 Situation at a glanceOn 26 June 2023, the National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control (CDC) of Peru issued an epidemiological alert due to an unusual increase in Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) cases in different regions of the country. According to historical data (excluding the 2019 outbreak), the average monthly number of GBS cases registered is less than 20 suspected cases per month nationwide. However, between 10 June – 15 July 2023, 130 suspected cases1 of GBS have been reported. Out of these cases, 44 have been confirmed. 2,3 This increase in the number of observed cases is higher than expected. The Presidency of the Republic of Peru in early July 2023, declared a national health emergency due to the unusual increase and enhanced the implementation of public health responses. To date, the potential cause of the unexpected GBS incidence remains under investigation.WHO advises Member States to maintain the ongoing monitoring of the incidence and trends of neurological disorders, especially GBS, to identify variations against their expected baseline values and implement protocols for improved patient management. By closely observing and tracking these conditions, countries can effectively respond to any changes and ensure appropriate measures are in place to address potential public health concerns.Description of the situationBetween epidemiological weeks 1 and 28 (until 15 July 2023), a total of 231 suspected GBS cases were reported in Peru as defined by the National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control (CDC) Technical Health Standard for Epidemiological Surveillance and Laboratory Diagnosis for GBS1 in 20 of the country’s 24 departments. Fifty-six percent of the cases (130 cases) were reported between epidemiological weeks 23 (10 June 2023) and 28 (15 July 2023).  Since the start of the year, the highest number of GBS cases were recorded in seven of the country’s 24 departments: Lima and Callao (75 cases), La Libertad (39), Piura (21), Lambayeque (20), Cajamarca (17), Junín (12), and Cusco (10). As of 15 July 2023, 100 cases have been confirmed to be compatible with GBS 2,3, including four deaths (Case Fatality Rate (CFR) 1.7%).The age group most affected were adults ≥ 30 years (158 cases) while children under 17 years of age accounted for 19% of the cases (44 cases). More than half of the reported cases (133; 57.6%) were males.The preliminary clinical manifestations of the 130 cases reported between epidemiological weeks 23 (10 July 2023) and 28 (15 July 2023) include gastrointestinal infection, respiratory infection and fever. In addition, 72.3% of these cases (94 cases) presented with upward progression of paralysis as neurological manifestation, with other cases presenting with some type of sequelae. Samples were collected from the cases according to the technical health standard for epidemiological surveillance and laboratory diagnosis of GBS in Peru. Between epidemiological weeks 23 and 28, 22 samples were collected of which 14 (63%) were positive for Campylobacter jejuni (one of the most common risk factors for GBS) in samples from the departments of La Libertad (5 cases), Lima (4), Piura (3), Cusco (1) and Lambayeque (1), with the sample from Lambayeque further characterised as genotype Campylobacter jejuni sequence type (ST)2993.Epidemiology of the diseaseGuillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) is a rare neurological disorder of variable clinical severity, including fatal outcomes. It is the most common form of acute flaccid paralysis worldwide and is characterized by motor weakness, areflexia (absence of muscle reflexes), sensory abnormalities, and elevated protein levels in cerebrospinal fluid (cytoalbuminologic dissociation). Most often, an upper respiratory or gastrointestinal illness typically precedes GBS.There is currently no known cure for GBS. However, people with GBS need supportive treatment, sometimes in intensive care and follow-up. Most treatments available can help manage the symptoms, support the recovery process, and potentially shorten the duration of the illness. Although most cases, even the most serious ones, fully recover, they can produce almost total paralysis. Campylobacter jejuni infection is the most frequently identified precipitant and usually is associated with the acute motor axonal neuropathy form of GBS. While this syndrome is more common in adults and in males, people of all ages can be affected.In 2019, Peru reported an unprecedented outbreak of GBS that affected several regions of the country, with almost 700 reported cases (incidence: 1.2/100,000 inhabitants). From the clinical-epidemiological characteristics and the study of the identified agents, it was concluded that the outbreak was associated with the presence of the Campylobacter jejuni sequence type (ST) 2993 genotype. In addition, during the year 2020, a total of 448 cases were reported nationally with a weekly average of 11 cases; in 2021, a total of 210 cases were reported with a weekly average of four cases. Similarly, in 2022, there were 225 cases reported with a consistent weekly average of four cases.Figure 1. Guillain Barré Syndrome case trends in Peru 2021, 2022 and 2023 (Epidemiological week 28)Source: National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention and Disease Control (CDC) Peru-Peru. The situation of Guillain Barré syndrome -Peru, 2023 (Epidemiological Week 28)The National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control (CDC) of Peru of the Ministry of Health issued an epidemiological alert on 26 June 2023 and has maintained monitoring of the situation through a GBS Situation Room.On 8 July 2023, the Presidency of the Republic of Peru declared a national health emergency due to the unusual increase in cases of GBS. The decree provides:WHO is supporting the health authorities of Peru in the management of this event.Guillain-Barré syndrome is a rare condition, and while it is more common in adults and males, people of all ages can be affected. The cause of it is not fully understood, but most cases follow an infection with a virus or bacteria. This leads the immune system to attack the body itself. Infection with the bacteria Campylobacter jejuni, which causes gastroenteritis, is one of the most common risk factors for GBS. People can also develop GBS after having the flu or other viral infections, including cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and the Zika virus. In rare instances, vaccinations may increase the risk of people getting GBS, but the likelihood of this occurring is extremely low. Studies show that people are much more likely to get GBS from infections such as the flu than from the vaccine given to prevent the infection, in this case, the flu vaccine. Occasionally, surgery can trigger GBS.To date, the potential cause of the reported increase in GBS incidence in Peru remains under investigation as Campylobacter jejuni infection was confirmed by the laboratory in 63% of GBS cases from 22 samples tested since epidemiological week 23. In 2019, Peru reported an unprecedented outbreak of Guillain-Barré Syndrome that affected several regions of the country, which was concluded to be associated with the presence of the Campylobacter jejuni ST2993 genotype.Further investigations are needed to identify the possible causes associated with the increase. So far, no association has been found with the current dengue outbreak, and Zika virus transmission is currently low in the country. Additionally, there have been no reports of a similar surge in cases in other countries of the Americas.WHO advice to Member States is to continue to monitor the incidence and trends of neurological disorders, especially GBS, to identify variations against their expected baseline values, develop and implement sufficient patient management protocols to manage the additional burden on healthcare facilities generated by a sudden increase in patients with GBS, raise awareness among healthcare workers and establish and/or strengthen links between public health services and clinicians in the public and private sectors.WHO has not issued any recommendations that would impose travel and/or trade restrictions specifically for Peru in response to this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (25 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Guillain-Barré syndrome in Peru. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON477   Situation at glance:On 10 July 2023, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), notified WHO of a case of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in a 28-year-old male from Al Ain city in Abu Dhabi. The case had no history of direct or indirect contact with dromedaries, goats, or sheep. The patient was admitted to the hospital on 8 June. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 21 June and tested positive for MERS-CoV by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 23 June 2023. All 108 identified contacts were monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure to the MERS-CoV patient. No secondary cases have been detected to date.Since July 2013, when the UAE reported the first case of MERS-CoV, 94 confirmed cases (including this new case) and 12 deaths have been reported. Globally, the total number of confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO since 2012 is 2605, including 936 associated deaths.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries.WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Description of the case:On 10 July 2023, the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP) of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) notified WHO of a confirmed case of MERS-CoV in Abu Dhabi. The patient is a 28-year-old male, non- Emirati national living in Al Ain city, a non-healthcare worker.  The case visited a private medical center multiple times between 3 and 7 June 2023, complaining of vomiting, right flank pain, and dysuria (pain when passing urine). On 8 June, the case presented to a government hospital with vomiting, and gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhea, and was given an initial diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, acute kidney injury, and sepsis.On 13 June, he was in critical condition and referred to an intensive care unit (ICU) at a specialized government tertiary hospital where he was put on mechanical ventilation. He deteriorated and a nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 21 June and tested positive for MERS-CoV by PCR on 23 June 2023.The case has no known co-morbidities, no history of contact with MERS-CoV human cases, and no recent travel outside the UAE. The patient has no known history of direct contact with animals including dromedary camels, nor consumption of their raw products.All 108 contacts that were identified have been monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure to the MERS-CoV patient, no secondary case was identified. The case has no family members or household contacts identified in the UAE.Prior to this notification, the last MERS-CoV infection reported from the UAE was in November 2021. The first laboratory-confirmed case of MERS-CoV in UAE was in July 2013. Since then, the UAE has reported 94 cases of MERS-CoV (including this current case) and 12 associated deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR): 13%).Epidemiology of the disease:Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection that is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the MERS-CoV infection.MERS-CoV infections range from asymptomatic or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of a person with MERS-CoV disease is fever, cough and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems and those with chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit resulting in high mortality.No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and treatments are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition. Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease in humans resulting in high mortality. Approximately 35% of patients with MERS-CoV have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems. Until more is known about the disease, the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries, a host and zoonotic source of MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to be transmitted between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings. Outside of the healthcare setting, there has been limited human-to-human transmission.Cases of MERS-CoV infection are rare in the UAE. Since July 2013, a total of 94 MERS-CoV cases, including this current case, resulting in 12 deaths (CFR 13%) have been reported to WHO from the UAE.Globally, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO since 2012 is 2605, including 936 associated deaths as of July 2023. The majority of the reported cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. Outside of this region, there has been one large outbreak in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in the Republic of Korea and one in China) and 38 deaths were reported. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date.The notification of this case does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or in a healthcare setting.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Given that this latest case presents with severe disease but has no comorbidities and no exposure history to camels, camel raw products or MERS-CoV human case, it will be important to sequence the virus and conduct genomic analysis to screen for any unusual patterns. The process for genomic analysis has begun. This will identify any genetic evolution of the virus and support WHO’s global risk assessment efforts. As a general precaution, anyone visiting farms, markets, barns or other places where dromedaries are present should practice general hygiene measures, including regular hand washing after touching animals, avoiding touching eyes, nose or mouth with hands, and avoiding contact with sick animals. People may also consider wearing protective gowns and gloves while professionally handling animals.The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk, meat, blood and urine, carries a high risk of infection from a variety of organisms that might cause disease in humans. Animal products processed appropriately through proper cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption but should also be handled carefully to avoid cross-contamination with uncooked foods.Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health-care facilities. Health -care facilities should ensure environmental and engineering controls are in place including adequate ventilation, spatial separation of at least one meter between patients and others, including health and care workers and adequate environmental cleaning. Health care workers should consistently apply standard precautions to all patients at every interaction in healthcare settings. Droplet precautions, including eye protection, should be applied in addition to standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures or in settings where aerosol-generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care settings, and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and in immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus in United Arab Emirates. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON478Situation at a glanceSince the beginning of 2023, dengue outbreaks of significant magnitude have been recorded in the WHO Region of the Americas, with close to three million suspected and confirmed cases of dengue reported so far this year, surpassing the 2.8 million cases of dengue registered for the entire year of 2022. Of the total number of dengue cases reported until 1 July 2023 (2 997 097 cases), 45% were laboratory confirmed, and 0.13% were classified as severe dengue. The highest number of dengue cases to date in 2023 are in Brazil, Peru, and Bolivia. Additionally, 1302 deaths were reported in the Region with a Case Fatality Rate (CFR) of 0.04%, in the same period.As part of the implementation of the Integrated Management Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Arboviral Diseases (IMS-Arbovirus), WHO is actively working with the Member States to strengthen healthcare and surveillance capacity.WHO has assessed the risk of dengue as high at the regional level due to the wide spread distribution of the Aedes spp. mosquitoes (especially Aedes aegypti), the continued risk of severe disease and death, and the expansion out of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of warning signs.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for countries in the Americas experiencing the current dengue epidemics based on the currently available information.Description of the situationDengue is the arbovirus that causes the highest number of cases in the Region of the Americas, with epidemics occurring cyclically every 3 to 5 years. During the first half of 2023, dengue outbreaks of significant magnitude were recorded in South America.  Between epidemiological week (EW) 1 and EW 26 of 2023 (week ending on 01 July), a total of 2 997 097 cases of dengue were reported in the Region of the Americas, including 1302 deaths with a CFR of 0.04%, with a cumulative incidence rate of 305 cases per 100 000 population. Of the total number of dengue cases until EW 26 of 2023, 1 348 234 (45%) were laboratory confirmed, and 3907 (0.13%) were classified as severe dengue.1 The highest number of dengue cases was observed in Brazil, with 2 376 522 cases, followed by Peru with 188 326 cases, and Bolivia with 133 779 cases.The highest cumulative incidence rates were observed in the following subregions: the Southern Cone2 with 862 cases per 100 000 inhabitants, the Andean Subregion3 with 268 cases per 100 000 inhabitants, and the Central American Isthmus and Mexico4 with 59 cases per 100 000 inhabitants.The highest number of severe dengue cases was observed in the following countries: Brazil with 1249 cases, Peru with 701 cases, Colombia with 683 cases, Bolivia with 591 cases and Mexico with 141 cases.All four dengue virus serotypes (DENV1, DENV2, DENV3, and DENV4) are present in the Region of the Americas. In 2023, up to EW 26 (ending on 1 July), simultaneous circulation of all four serotypes has been detected in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Venezuela; while in Argentina, Panama, Peru, and Puerto Rico, DENV1, DENV2 and DENV3 serotypes circulate, and in Nicaragua the serotypes DENV1, DENV3 and DENV4.In 2022, 2 811 433 dengue cases were reported in the Region of the Americas, the third highest year on record, only surpassed by 2016 and 2019. In 2019, the highest number of historical dengue cases was registered, with more than 3.1 million cases for the Region of the Americas, including 28 203 severe cases and 1823 deaths.Between 12 June to 1 July 2023, some countries in the Southern Cone and the Andean subregion have been showing a decrease in the number of cases due to multiple factors, including, the implementation of control measures, and the change in temperature and climate, mainly in the Southern Cone. There is also a delay in the notification of data from some countries in Central America and the Caribbean. These have resulted in a decline in cases and the downward trend observed in the epidemiological curve below.Figure 1. Number of dengue cases in 2022, 2023 (up to EW 26) and average of the last 5 years in the Region of the AmericasSource: Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region. Available from: https://opendata.paho.org/en.  Accessed July 11, 2023. Figure 2. Suspected cases (A) and cumulative incidence per 100 0000 population(B) of dengue in the most affected countries** in the Region of the Americas, as of 01 July 2023** Countries which reported 99% of cases in the Region of the AmericasSource: Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region. Accessed July 11, 2023Figure 3. Deaths(A) and CFR(B) from dengue in the Region of the Americas, as of EW 26, 2023Source: Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region.Overview by selected countriesAlthough dengue is endemic in most countries of South America, Central America, and the Caribbean, during the current season, an increase in dengue cases has been observed at levels above the average number of cases recorded in the last five years and beyond historical areas of transmission. Below is a summary of the epidemiological situation of dengue in most affected countries5 in the Region of the Americas reported to PAHO/WHO.Argentina6According to the Argentina IHR National Focal Point, up to EW 26 of 2023 (week ending on 01 July), 126 431 cases of dengue were reported, of which 118 089 were autochthonous, 1398 were imported, and 6944 are under investigation. Fifty-three percent of the cases were laboratory-confirmed and 304 (0.24%) were classified as severe dengue. A total of 65 deaths were reported during this period with a CFR of 0.05%. Compared to the last epidemiological outbreak of dengue recorded in the country in the 2019/2020 season (59 264 cases year 2020), there is a 47% increase in the number of cases in the 2022/2023 period (126 431 cases year 2023).BrazilIn 2023 up to EW 26, of the 2 376 522 reported dengue cases, 1 051 773 (44.2%) were laboratory confirmed, and 1 249 (0.05%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 26 of 2023 show an increase of 13% compared to the same period of 2022 and 73% compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, a total of 769 deaths were reported with CFR of 0.03%.BoliviaIn 2023 up to EW 25, of the 133 779 reported dengue cases, 22 761 (17%) were laboratory confirmed, and 591 (0.44%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered to EW 25 of 2023 are 16 times higher than those reported in the same period of 2022 and five times higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, 77 deaths were reported with CFR of 0.06%.ColombiaIn 2023 up to EW 25, of the 50 818 reported dengue cases, 25 958 (51%) were laboratory confirmed, and 683 (1.34%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered in EW 25 of 2023 are 66% higher than those reported in the same period of 2022 and 47% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, 29 deaths were reported with CFR of 0.06%.Costa RicaIn 2023, up to EW 25, of the 2712 reported dengue cases, 254 (9.3%) were laboratory confirmed, and there were no cases of severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 25 of 2023 are 16% higher compared to the same period of 2022, and 19% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, no deaths were reported.GuatemalaIn 2023, up to EW 24, of the 4529 reported dengue cases, 699 (15%) were laboratory confirmed, and six (0.13%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 24 of 2023 are 80% higher compared to the same period of 2022, and 45% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, five deaths were reported with CFR of 0.11%. Mexico7According to the Mexico IHR National Focal Point, up to EW 26 of 2023, of the 31 549 reported dengue cases, 4400 (14%) were laboratory confirmed, and 141 (2%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 26 of 2023 are 2.5 times higher compared to the same period in 2022 and 58% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, five deaths were reported with CFR of 0.02%.NicaraguaIn 2023, up to EW 25, of the 56 780 reported suspected dengue cases, 1016 (1.8%) were laboratory confirmed, and 10 (0.02%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 25 of 2023 are 2.7 times higher compared to the same period in 2022 and 2.1 times higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, one death was reported with CFR of 0.002%.Panama8In 2023, up to EW 24, of the 3176 reported dengue cases, 2161 (68%) were laboratory confirmed, and seven (0.22%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 24 of 2023 are 54% higher compared to the same period of 2022, and 63% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, no deaths were reported.Peru9In 2023 up to EW 26, of the 188 326 reported dengue cases, 105 215 (55.9%) were laboratory confirmed, and 701 (0.37%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 26 of 2023 are 3.1 times higher than those reported in the same period of 2022. In the same period, a total of 325 deaths were reported between suspected and confirmed cases, with CFR of 0.17%.Epidemiology of the diseaseDengue is a viral infection that spreads from mosquitoes to people. It is more common in tropical and subtropical climates. Most people who get dengue won’t have symptoms. But for those that do, the most common symptoms are high fever, headache, body aches, nausea and rash. Most people will get better in 1–2 weeks, however, some people develop severe dengue which includes shock or respiratory distress due to plasma leakage, severe bleeding, organ impairment, and death.In severe cases, dengue can be fatal. The risk of dengue can be avoided by avoiding mosquito bites especially during the day. There is currently no specific treatment for dengue, therefore, case management focuses on managing pain symptoms with Acetaminophen. Some of the severe cases are secondary infections (people getting infected for a second time with another serotype).The incidence of dengue has grown dramatically around the world in recent decades, with cases reported to WHO increasing from 505 430 cases in 2000 to 5.2 million in 2019 globally. A vast majority of cases are asymptomatic or mild and self-managed, and hence the actual numbers of dengue cases are under-reported. Many cases are also misdiagnosed as other febrile illnesses.The disease is now endemic in more than 100 countries in the WHO Regions of Africa, the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean, South-East Asia and the Western Pacific. The Americas, South-East Asia and Western Pacific regions are the most seriously affected, with Asia representing around 70% of the global disease burden.The largest number of dengue cases ever reported globally was in 2019. All regions were affected, and dengue transmission was recorded in Afghanistan for the first time. The American Region reported 3.1 million cases, with more than 25 000 classified as severe. A high number of cases were reported in Bangladesh (101 000), Malaysia (131 000) Philippines (420 000), and Vietnam (320 000).Ministry of Health (MoH) response: WHO response: Dengue is a mosquito - borne viral disease (arbovirus) that has the potential to cause serious public health impact. The virus that causes this infection has been circulating in the region of the Americas for decades10 due to the widespread distribution of the Aedes spp. mosquitoes (mainly Aedes aegypti), with epidemics occurring cyclically every 3 to 5 years. Several dengue outbreaks have been documented previously in the Region.This arbovirus can be carried by infected travellers (imported cases) and may establish new areas of local transmission in the presence of vectors and a susceptible population. As they are arboviruses, all populations living in areas with the presence of Aedes aegypti are at risk, however, their impact largely affects the most vulnerable people, in which the arboviral disease programs do not have enough resources to respond to outbreaks.The consequences of the current high transmission scenario depend on several factors, including the current capacities for a coordinated public health response and clinical management, the early start of the arbovirus season in the southern hemisphere, high mosquito densities and the possible impact of climate change and El Nino phenomenon in the southern hemisphere, lack of vector surveillance and control activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and high proportion of the susceptible population for arboviruses in the region. The current high transmission scenario for dengue occurs in the context of other ongoing outbreaks and emergencies. The synergic effects of concurrent emergencies may hinder the health system’s capacity to respond to an epidemic of arboviral diseases and therefore affect disease control and proper clinical management, including, but not limited to (i) misdiagnosis, given that  dengue symptoms may be non-specific and resemble other infections, including chikungunya, Zika and measles, potentially leading to inadequate case management;  (ii) overwhelmed healthcare facilities in some areas given high caseload, as well as other concurrent outbreaks of other communicable diseases; and (iii) the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the decrease of available resources to arboviral disease programs and the need for capacity building and training of vector-control and healthcare workers, as well as maintenance and procurement of equipment and insecticides to perform vector control activities.Dengue is endemic in most countries of South America. However, during the seasonal period in the first half of 2023, where dengue outbreaks have been detected, there has been an increase in the number of cases at levels above the average number of cases recorded in the last five years and the expansion of dengue out of historical areas of transmission.Aedes spp. mosquitoes are widely distributed in the Region of the Americas, therefore, dengue international spread is likely. Additionally, it is expected that in the second half of 2023, some countries in the Region, especially in Central America and the Caribbean, will have an increase in rainfall, which, depending on its magnitude and impact on dengue-endemic areas, could increase the incidence of the disease and constitute an additional burden of arboviral diseases for health systems in affected areas.The risk at the regional level is assessed as high due to the widely spread distribution of the vector (especially Aedes aegypti), the continued risk of severe disease and even death, and the expansion out of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of warning signs.Information on the circulating dengue virus serotype is limited. It is expected that a large proportion of the population in these areas is naïve to the current virus circulating, which may lead to outbreaks. Moreover, people in these areas may not be aware of warning signs, and the population might delay seeking health care.In some areas, there is a lack of medical facilities with limited geographical access, making it difficult for people to access basic health care. Especially in these areas, people tend to self-medicate, and in dengue cases ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are contraindicated because they can aggravate gastritis or bleeding and lead to increased mortality risk.  Other challenges reported by Member States in the Region include but are not limited to stockouts of several essential supplies for prevention and control, lack of reagents and consumables for laboratory diagnosis, and the need for re-training field teams and health workers. In addition, higher transmission rates are expected in the following months due to favourable weather conditions to vector activity in the second half of the year in Central America and the northern hemisphere.Dengue is caused by the dengue virus (DENV), an RNA virus of the family Flaviviridae. There are four distinct but closely related serotypes of the virus (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, and DENV-4) - recovery from infection provides lifelong immunity against that serotype. Although most cases of dengue are mild, the sequential infection by more than one serotype increases the risk of developing severe dengue, which includes shock or respiratory distress due to plasma leakage, severe bleeding, organ impairment, and death.Prevention efforts are highly focused on the surveillance and control of Aedes spp. mosquitoes (the most competent vector in the region). Since vector surveillance and control may be difficult to sustain, especially in areas where DENV is endemic year-round, early detection of severe disease progression and access to proper medical attention is key to lowering severe case rates and, therefore, case fatality rates. Personal protection and source reduction measures should be maintained by communities both at places of work or study and at homes. No specific antiviral treatment exists for chikungunya and dengue. Clinical management is based on supportive care, including fluids and antipyretics; recovery can provide   immunity (for that specific serotype in dengue cases). As symptoms of these arboviruses may overlap, clinical-epidemiological diagnostic may be challenging, and there is cross-reactivity of the immunoglobulin M and G antibodies (IgM and IgG) of dengue and Zika viruses, hindering accurate diagnosis, which can lead to inadequate case management, and compromising efficient epidemiological surveillance. The reason why molecular diagnosis with RT-PCR is recommended.It is very important that the Member States in the Americas are extremely vigilant and prepared to intensify actions to prevent, early detect, diagnose, and control arboviruses, including training and alerting healthcare workers on the detection of cases and potential complications of these diseases, identification of risk groups for severe disease, appropriate clinical management and follow up of cases to prevent future deaths.  In the second half of 2023, an increase in dengue cases is expected. Targeted integrated vector surveillance, monitoring insecticide resistance in dengue vector and control measures are helpful in reducing transmission rates. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites, including the use of repellents. The highest risk for transmission of dengue is during the day and early evening.WHO reiterates to all Member States the importance of strengthening: 1) their laboratory capacity to recognize and confirm the cases timely; 2) their healthcare capacity to rapidly detect and manage cases, and 3) their surveillance capacity to rapidly detect trends on the incidence and implement control measures. It is relevant to maintain close monitoring of the situation in the region with active cross-border coordination and information sharing because of the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for countries in the Americas experiencing the current dengue epidemics based on the currently available information.[1] Argentina, Brasil, Chile Paraguay y Uruguay.[2] Bolivia,Colombia, Ecuador,Perú y Venezuela.[3] Belice, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, México, Nicaragua y Panamá.[4] Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region. Available from: https://opendata.paho.org/en. Accessed 11 July 2023.[5] Countries which reported 99% of cases in the Region of the Americas[6] Information provided by the Argentina IHR National Focal Point (NFP).[7] Information provided by the Mexico IHR NFP.[8] Information provided by the Panama IHR National Focal Point (NFP).[9] Information provided by the Peru IHR National Focal Point (NFP).[10] Dengue incidence has increased in the Americas over the past four decades, from 1.5 million cumulative cases in the 1980s to 16.2 million in the decade 2010-2019.Citable reference: World Health Organization (19 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue in the Region of the Americas. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON475Situation at a glanceOn 27 June 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Poland notified WHO of unusual deaths in cats across the country. As of 11 July, 47 samples have been tested from 46 cats and one captive caracal, of which 29 were found to be positive for influenza A (H5N1). Fourteen cats are reported to have been euthanized, and a further 11 died, with the last death reported on 30 June. The source of the exposure of cats to the virus is currently unknown and epizootic investigations are ongoing.Sporadic infection of cats with A(H5N1) has previously been reported, but this is the first report of a high numbers of infected cats over a wide geographical area within a country.As of 12 July, no human contacts of A(H5N1) positive cats have reported symptoms, and the surveillance period for all contacts is now complete.The risk of human infections following exposure to infected cats at the national level is assessed as low for the general population, and low to moderate for cat owners and those occupationally exposed to  H5N1-infected cats (such as veterinarians) without the use of appropriate personal protective equipment.WHO continues to monitor the situation and work in close collaboration with the animal and public health sectors, regional agencies, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), and other partner agencies in Poland.Description of situationOn 27 June 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Poland notified WHO of unusual deaths in cats across the country. As of 11 July 2023, a total of 47 samples have been tested from 46 cats and one caracal (Caracal caracal). Of these 47 samples, 29 (62%) were positive for influenza A(H5N1). Positive samples were reported from 13 geographical areas within the country.Some cats developed severe symptoms including difficulty in breathing, bloody diarrhoea, and neurological signs, with rapid deterioration and death in some cases. In total, 20 cats had neurological signs, 19 had respiratory signs, and 17 had both neurological and respiratory signs. Fourteen cats are reported to have been euthanized, and a further 11 died.  Post-mortem exams on a small number of cats are suggestive of pneumonia. According to the information available, the last known death among cats was reported on 30 June .Genomic analysis of 19 viruses sequenced from this outbreak showed that they all belonged to the H5 clade 2.3.4.4b and were highly related to each other. Also, the viruses are similar to influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses which have been circulating in wild birds and which caused outbreaks in poultry recently in Poland. The source of exposure of cats to the virus is currently unknown and epizootic investigations are ongoing. There are several possibilities for the source of infection, among which the cats could have had direct or indirect contact with infected birds or their environments, ate infected birds, or ate food contaminated with the virus. Authorities are investigating all potential sources and to date have not ruled out any. Of the 25 cats for which the information is available, two were outdoor cats, 18 were indoor with access to a balcony, terrace, or backyard, and five were indoor cats with no access to the outside environment. Seven cats are reported to have had the opportunity for contact with wild birds. This is the first report of high numbers of cats infected with avian influenza A(H5N1) spread over a wide geographical area within any country.  Sporadic infections in domestic cats with A(H5N1) viruses, including A(H5N1) H5 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses, have been reported previously, following close contact of the cats with infected birds or from ingesting meat of infected birds.Epidemiology of H5N1Since the end of 2021, an unprecedented number of H5N1 outbreaks among poultry and wild birds has been reported worldwide. As of June 2023, the clade 2.3.4.4b viruses have become dominant in Asia, Europe, the Americas and Africa. Alongside wild bird and domestic poultry infections, there have been increased detections in non-avian species, including wild terrestrial (often scavenging) and marine mammals and occasionally in farmed or captive mammalian species, likely through contact with  infected live or dead birds or their environments. Since 2020, 12 human cases of avian influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus detections have been reported to WHO, four of which were severe cases and eight were mild or asymptomatic. It is unclear if the detection of the virus in these mild or asymptomatic cases resulted from infection or temporary contamination of the nasal passages. Most humans infected with A(H5N1) viruses have resulted from direct or indirect contact with infected live or dead poultry. Human infection with influenza A(H5N1) viruses can cause severe disease and is fatal in some cases.Response measures have been implemented by the national authorities in Poland. These include:WHO continues to monitor the situation and work in close collaboration with the animal and public health sectors, regional agencies, FAO, WOAH, and other partner agencies in Poland and globally.WHO is evaluating the existing candidate vaccine viruses (CVVs) of A(H5N1) through the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) to ensure valid CVVs are developed and available for pandemic preparedness purposes.To date, human A(H5N1) infections following contact with an infected cat have not been documented. Avian Influenza A(H5N1) virus detections in humans remain unusual, and sustained human-to-human transmission has not been documented.To date, no symptomatic human contact of infected cats has been reported in Poland despite potentially close contact between cats and owners,  and the capacity to detect a human case in contact with an infected cat is adequate in the country. Therefore, based on current information, the risk of human infections following exposure to infected cats at the national level is assessed as low for the general population, and low to moderate for cat owners and those occupationally exposed to A(H5N1)-infected cats (such as veterinarians) without the use of appropriate personal protective equipment.Based on the current information, the risk for humans at the regional level is assessed as low, due to: i) avian influenza surveillance activities in animals in Europe being strengthened since September 2022, when the unprecedented geographical extent (37 European countries affected) resulted in 50 million poultry being culled in affected establishments; and (ii) Currently, there are no reported instances of human infection with the A(H5N1) virus acquired from cats, although A(H5N1) infection in domestic cats has been confirmed in Poland.Due to the uncertainties related to this event, including the source of infection, the risk assessment may change.The reports of these events do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus-sharing for risk assessment.All individuals exposed to animal influenza viruses, and all contacts of confirmed human cases, should monitor their health for the duration of the known exposure period with additional seven days at a minimum.All those exposed to known infected poultry, wild birds or other animals, or to farms under suspicion, should be registered and placed under close monitoring by local health authorities. This will facilitate the early detection of illness and timely clinical case management. If a person is suspected of having zoonotic influenza, the health authorities must be notified, and appropriate clinical case management should be provided.Public health and animal health authorities should collaborate closely in the areas of information sharing, joint risk assessment, and response to outbreaks of zoonotic influenza at the human-animal interface, adhering to the One Health approach.FAO, WHO and WOAH have issued a joint situation analysis and advice to countries in relation to ongoing avian influenza outbreaks in animals and the risk posed to human health.  FAO, WHO and WOAH continue to review the situation, monitoring the rapidly evolving nature of the virus, and updating recommendations for curbing its spread, in addition to working with countries in preparedness and response, and facilitating collaboration across countries and sectors. The spread of the virus to five continents speaks to the need for global cooperation and alertness to protect animals, people, and economies.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade with Poland based on available information on this event. References Citable reference: World Health Organization (16 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News;Influenza A(H5N1) in cats in Poland . Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON476  Situation at a glanceSince the Disease Outbreak News published on 31 May 2023 which reported enterovirus, Echovirus 11 (E-11) infection in France, additional Member States in the European Region have notified WHO of cases of E-11 among newborns.As of 26 June 2023, Croatia, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland have reported cases of E-11 infection confirmed in newborns. Further investigations and public health responses are being implemented in each of these Member States.This Disease Outbreak News provides updates on the event and the public health response implemented in the reporting and non-reporting countries in the European Region.Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low, while we continue to encourage countries to monitor for and report on cases. Health facilities caring for newborns should familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of echovirus and maintain vigilance for potential healthcare-associated infections and outbreaks.Description of the casesOn 5 May 2023, France reported an increase in cases of severe neonatal sepsis associated with Enterovirus (Echovirus-11 (E-11)). A total of nine cases of neonatal sepsis with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure with seven deaths were reported between July 2022 and April 2023 from four hospitals in three regions of France.As of 26 June 2023, Croatia reported one confirmed case of E-11 infection from a cluster of enterovirus diseases in neonates detected in June 2023, Italy has reported seven cases of E-11 infection confirmed in neonates between April and June 2023, Spain reported two cases of E-11 infection in 2023, Sweden reported five E-11 cases with four cases of meningoencephalitis among infants due to E-11 infection between 2022 and 15 June 2023, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the UK) reported two cases in March 2023. France:As of 26 June 2023, France has reported nine cases of severe E-11 neonatal sepsis associated with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure confirmed by enterovirus Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) testing of blood samples, throat swabs, nasopharyngeal swabs, cerebrospinal fluid samples, and/or post-mortem biopsies from three French metropolitan regions between July 2022 and April 2023.  Six of the nine cases occurred in 2022 (July, October and December, n=2 each) and three cases in 2023 (January (n=1) and April (n=2)). Eight cases were preterm (born before 37 weeks gestation) in four pairs of twins born at 31 and 36 weeks. Of the nine cases, there were seven reported deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) = 78%), two have been discharged from the hospital and remain under follow-up. Detailed investigation of the cases was published in the Disease Outbreak News on 31 May 2023. No additional similar cases of severe neonatal E-11 infections have been reported so far.Croatia:Croatia reported one confirmed case of E-11 infection from a cluster of enterovirus disease in neonates detected in June 2023 from two separate maternity hospitals. Further investigations are ongoing with no additional cases reported so far.    Italy:As of 26 June 2023, seven cases of neonatal E-11 infection have been confirmed in Italy between April and June 2023. Three out of the seven cases were admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). At the time of reporting, one case remains in the NICU, one is showing clinical improvement and one has been discharged. Two more cases, who tested positive at screening were without significant symptoms. Further investigation of the remaining two cases is ongoing with clinical and epidemiological data pending.   Spain:Two cases of E-11 infection have been reported in Spain as of 26 June 2023. These cases were preterm twins born in January 2023. Both cases were admitted to the NICU after birth with one recorded death and a diagnosis of severe enterovirus infection with probable vertical transmission, while the second case was discharged from the hospital without sequelae.Enterovirus infection was laboratory confirmed in blood samples in both cases, one case also tested positive in stool samples and nasopharyngeal aspirates. Further sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the virus are awaited.According to data available at the Spanish National Centre for Microbiology, E-11 has been in circulation in Spain in 2022 and 2023, but available E-11 data does not indicate an increase in incidence or severity in neonates.         Sweden:Sweden reported four cases of infants with meningoencephalitis due to E-11 between the beginning of 2022 and 15 June 2023.  In addition to the four infant cases reported through the mandatory reporting of viral meningoencephalitis, one infant case of E-11 was detected in 2022 through enhanced enterovirus surveillance. None of the reported cases are twins.  Epidemiological analysis of trends in probable causative agents in cases reported with viral meningoencephalitis in 2022 did not indicate any findings beyond the expected.The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland:The United Kingdom reported two cases of E-11 infection in one pair of twins in March 2023. Both cases presented with several clinical conditions including hepatitis and multiorgan failure with rapid deterioration from the fourth day of birth to the tenth day when they were deceased.  Laboratory testing confirmed the presence of enterovirus, typed as E-11. Currently, the United Kingdom is not aware of new additional E-11 cases.Other countries in WHO European region:So far, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, and Norway have reported that in 2022 and 2023 no increase of E-11 associated with cases of neonatal sepsis has been observed.Epidemiology of diseaseEnteroviruses are a group of viruses that can cause various infectious illnesses and are responsible for annual epidemics. Illness is usually mild but has been found to affect neonates differently and sometimes more severely than older children and adults. There are multiple transmission routes, particularly in the neonatal period, including intrapartum by exposure to maternal blood, secretions, and/or stool, or postnatally from close contacts with infected caregivers.   Echovirus 11 (E-11) is a positive-strand RNA virus belonging to the genus Enterovirus of the family Picornaviridae. Like other enteroviruses, E-11 infections are associated with a wide spectrum of illnesses, ranging from mild nonspecific symptoms to systemic disorders such as rash, febrile illness to severe neurological disorders, including meningitis, encephalitis and acute flaccid paralysis (AFP).Echovirus 11 (E-11) has been reported to cause severe illnesses in neonates and infants, with high morbidity and mortality. In addition, E-11 can be transmitted vertically from mother to child, increasing the difficulty of controlling infections. The infections can cause severe inflammatory illnesses in neonates, including severe acute hepatitis with coagulopathy. E-11 and other enteroviruses have been circulating continuously in the European region.The European Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and WHO held a collaborative call with Member States to discuss the event and encourage both affected and non-affected Member States to collaborate with further information sharing.France:Continuous information sharing regarding this event among France and other Member States (through the European Non-Polio Enterovirus Network (ENPEN)), the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and WHO is ongoing.  Also, there are ongoing plans to publish the complete genome sequence of the virus on GenBank, the National Institutes of Health genetic sequence database.  Details of the reported cases (complete genome sequence available for the French cases) have been published in Eurosurveillance.Croatia:Isolation and typing of the enterovirus from the mentioned clusters detected in June 2023 are ongoing.ItalyDetails of two of the confirmed cases have also been published in Eurosurveillance. Further investigations of the confirmed cases and other probable cases are ongoing. The event is currently being monitored with response and prevention activities ongoing.Spain:Further investigations of the confirmed cases are ongoing.  The United Kingdom:Further sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the virus are awaited. SwedenThe Public Health Agency of Sweden has sent an informational letter to all child clinics, microbiological laboratories and regional medical officers to enhance awareness and increase specimen collection suitable for enterovirus typing.Between 2022 and June 2023, a few Member States in the European Region reported the detection of positive enterovirus, especially Echovirus 11 (E-11) cases. These include Croatia, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden and the UK. So far, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Norway have reported no increase of E-11 associated with cases of neonatal sepsis has been observed in 2022 and 2023. Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low. However, asymptomatic carriage and shedding of infectious viruses are a feature of enterovirus infection.Although some countries have enterovirus surveillance, there is no systematic European-wide enterovirus surveillance in place in the European Region. It is therefore difficult to estimate the extent of the current severe neonatal E-11 infections or background rates for circulation of E-11 viruses in the population. Without enterovirus surveillance, only the most severe cases will probably be detected through active efforts to test and type specimens from such cases. As non-polio enterovirus infection is often not a notifiable disease in Member States, additional cases of severe neonatal enterovirus infection may have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported.   Non-polio enteroviruses are common and distributed worldwide. Although infections often are asymptomatic, some may present with respiratory tract infections. Some of the reported cases had fever and apnoea and progressed to hepatocellular and renal failure within the neonatal sepsis presentation. These viruses are also associated with occasional outbreaks in which an unusually high proportion of patients develop clinical disease, sometimes with serious and fatal consequences. Clinicians managing neonates and young infants presenting with circulatory shock should consider an underlying diagnosis of sepsis and perform appropriate diagnostic investigations, including testing for enteroviruses.Health-care staff working with samples suspicious of non-polio enteroviruses should be properly trained to collect, store, and transport various samples. If samples are referred domestically and/or internationally for confirmation, typing, or sequencing purposes, appropriate national and international regulations on the transport of infectious substances should be strictly followed. Laboratories that perform sequencing should consider sharing genetic sequence data through publicly accessible databases.  No specific antiviral therapy for echovirus infection is available, and treatment focuses on preventing complications. Health facilities caring for obstetric and neonate populations should familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of echovirus infection and maintain vigilance for potential healthcare-associated infection cases and outbreaks in hospital units providing neonatal care. Health facilities and healthcare workers should implement infection prevention and control measures with a focus on adherence to WHO “Your 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene”, visitor restriction, re-enforcing the importance of cleaning and disinfecting the environment and use of contact precautions when caring for neonates suspected or confirmed to have E-11. For suspected and confirmed neonatal cases consider isolation, ensure utensils (e.g., cup, spoon, syringe) for supplemental feeding are not shared and educate mothers and caregivers on personal hygiene and handwashing during care of newborn including diaper change. WHO provides training for health and care workers on preventing maternal and neonatal infections in health facilities, which can be accessed on Open WHO.   European Centre for Disease Control (ECDC). Echovirus 11 in newly born twins: case in Italy shows close genetic relation to strains found in France among neonates. Available on  https://www.eurekalert.org/news-releases/992726 Citable reference: World Health Organization (07 July 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Enterovirus-Echovirus 11 Infection in the European Region. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON474  Situation at a glanceOn 7 June 2023, Brazil notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a fatal laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1) variant (v) virus in the inner state of Paraná.Sporadic human cases of influenza A(H1N1)v have been reported previously, including from Brazil. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR) 2005, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO.Based on the information currently available, WHO considers this a sporadic case, and there is no evidence of person-to-person transmission of this event. The likelihood of community-level spread among humans and/or international disease spread through humans is low.Description of the caseOn 7 June 2023, the Brazil IHR National Focal Point (NFP) notified WHO of a fatal human infection caused by a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1)v virus detected by the National Influenza Centre (NIC), Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro.The patient was a 42-year-old woman with underlying medical conditions who lived near a swine farm. She developed fever, headache, sore throat, and abdominal pain on 1 May 2023 and was hospitalized on 3 May with a severe acute respiratory infection. On 4 May, the patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and she passed away on 5 May.Ongoing investigations reported that the patient did not have any direct contact with pigs, however, two of her close contacts worked at the swine farm. The two contacts did not develop respiratory disease and tested negative for influenza. To date, no human-to-human transmission associated with this case has been identified. During hospitalization, a nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected from the patient for influenza and SARS-CoV-2 testing, as part of regular respiratory virus surveillance activities. Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) was conducted at the State of Paraná Central Public Health Laboratory, where the sample was subtyped as an influenza A/H1 virus. The sample also tested positive for a swine influenza A virus marker by RT-PCR. The specimen was forwarded to the National Influenza Centre Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, in Rio de Janeiro, where further complementary analyses and genomic sequencing were performed. Samples received at the NIC on 25 May were confirmed to be an influenza A(H1N1)v virus by sequence analysis on 30 May. The recovered genome has a high identity (99%) with the haemagglutinin (HA) of other Influenza A(H1N1)v viruses previously detected in the municipality of Toledo state of Paraná in 2022. In addition, it has 96% identity with the HA of viruses collected from pigs in Brazil in 2015.On 8 June, after the Brazilian Ministry of Health (MoH) notified WHO under the IHR, the NIC started the process to send the patient's samples to the WHO Collaborating Centre at the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) for further characterization. Epidemiology of the diseaseInfluenza A(H1) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. H1N1, H1N2 and H3N2 are major subtypes of swine influenza A viruses in pigs and occasionally infect humans, usually after direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments.Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal.To date, sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H1N1)v and A(H1N2)v viruses have been reported in Brazil, and there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.This is the first human infection caused by an influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in 2023 in Brazil, and the third human infection reported in the state of Parana (the first was detected in 2021 and the second in 2022).Local and national health authorities implemented the following public health measures:This is a sporadic case based on currently available information and further spread has not been detected.Limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses has been described, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans.There is no vaccine for Influenza A(H1N1)v infection currently licensed for use in humans. Seasonal influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs, but they can reduce the likelihood of getting sick with both human and variant influenza viruses.WHO assesses the risk of international disease spread through humans and/or community-level spread among humans posed by this event as low. The risk level will be amended if warranted by the investigations currently being conducted by national authorities.Surveillance:Notification and investigation:Travel and trade:Prevention measures for travelers: Citable reference: World Health Organization (16 June 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Influenza A(H1N1) variant virus - Brazil. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON473Situation at a glanceOn 8 June 2023, after two consecutive incubation periods (42 days) without a new confirmed case reported, the Ministry of Health of Equatorial Guinea declared the end of the Marburg virus disease (MVD) outbreak, as per the WHO recommendations. A total of 17 confirmed and 23 probable cases were reported from five districts in four provinces; 12 of the 17 confirmed cases died and all of the probable cases were reported deaths.  WHO and partners provided technical support to the government to contain this outbreak through its country office.WHO encourages maintaining most response activities for three months after the outbreak ends. This is to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities are able to detect it immediately, prevent the disease from spreading again, and ultimately save lives.Description of the situationOn 13 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea declared an outbreak of MVD after suspected viral hemorrhagic fever deaths were reported between 7 January and 7 February 2023, and a case tested positive on 12 February for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the Institut Pasteur de Dakar in Senegal.From the outbreak declaration until 7 June 2023, 17 confirmed and 23 probable cases were reported in the continental region of Equatorial Guinea. Twelve of the confirmed cases died and all of the probable cases were reported deaths (the case fatality ratio among confirmed cases is 75%, excluding one confirmed case with an unknown outcome).The last confirmed case admitted to a Marburg treatment center in Bata district in Litoral province was discharged on 26 April, after two consecutive negative PCR tests for MVD. On 8 June 2023, after two consecutive incubation periods (42 days) without a new confirmed case reported, the Ministry of Health of Equatorial Guinea declared the end of the outbreak.Confirmed or probable cases were reported in five districts (Bata, Ebebiyin, Evinayong, Nsok Nsomo and Nsork) in four of the country’s eight provinces (Centro Sur, Kié-Ntem, Litoral and Wele-Nzas).Five cases (31%) were identified among healthcare workers, of whom two died (CFR among HCWs: 40%).Four patients recovered and were enrolled in a survivor care programme to receive psychosocial and other post-recovery support.Figure 1. MVD cases by week of symptoms onset* and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, as of 7 June 2023.Figure 2. Map of districts reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases during the outbreak, Equatorial Guinea.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, and clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating suspected or confirmed MVD patients. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg virus.The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, although not all cases have haemorrhagic signs, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas.Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, Remdesivir was used in this outbreak on compassionate care basis. Supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.This was the first documented outbreak of MVD reported in Equatorial Guinea. Another MVD outbreak was recently declared over in the United Republic of Tanzania (for more information, see the Disease Outbreak News published on 2 June 2023). MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).CoordinationPartner SupportSurveillanceLaboratoryClinical careInfection Prevention and Control (IPC) and WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene)Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE)Border health and points of entryOperational support and logistics (OSL)Readiness and preparedness in neighboring countriesIn compliance with WHO recommendations, the criteria to declare the end of an outbreak after two maximum incubation periods (42 days) was observed with no new confirmed or probable case of MVD detected.Based on knowledge of past outbreaks of filovirus disease, there remains a risk of re-emergence of MVD even following the declaration of the end of the outbreak. Undetected transmission of Marburg virus may exist in the country; not all chains of transmission were definitively linked, and one confirmed case was never identified. The initial source of the outbreak has not been identified, and a new emergence of disease is possible, including from interaction with animal reservoirs. The virus may also persist for an extended period in body fluids of survivors, including semen, underlying the importance of their participation in the survivors program, and the support the program provides.Based on the available information at the end of MVD outbreak in Equatorial Guinea, the risk of MVD remerging is considered as low at the national level, low at the subregional level, regional level and at the global level.The current WHO recommendation is that most response activities continue for three months after the outbreak ends, to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities can detect it right away, prevent the disease from spreading, and ultimately save lives.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce MVD transmission:WHO advises against applying international travel and/or trade measures to Equatorial Guinea.Citable reference: World Health Organization (9 June 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease - Equatorial Guinea. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON472Situation at a glanceOn 2 June 2023, the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania declared the end of its first documented outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD). Between 21 March and 31 May, a total of nine cases (eight laboratory-confirmed and one probable) were reported. All cases were reported from Bukoba district, Kagera region. A total of six deaths (case fatality ratio  67%) were reported during the outbreak.In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Marburg virus infection) after the last possible exposure to an MVD probable or confirmed case.WHO encourages countries to maintain most response activities for three months after the outbreak ends. This is to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities would be able to detect it immediately, prevent the disease from spreading again, and ultimately save lives.Description of the situationOn 21 March 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the United Republic of Tanzania officially declared the first MVD outbreak in the country. Between 21 March and 31 May, a total of nine cases, including eight laboratory-confirmed cases and one probable (the index case), were reported (Figure 1). The last confirmed case was reported on 11 April 2023 and the date of sample collection of the second negative PCR test was on 19 April 2023. All cases were reported from Bukoba district, Kagera region, in the north of the country.Among the confirmed cases, three have recovered, and a total of six deaths (CFR 67%) have been reported, of which five were confirmed and one was a probable case.Cases ranged in age from 1 to 59 years old (median 35 years old), with males being the most affected (n= 6; 67%). Six cases were close relatives of the index case, and two were healthcare workers who provided medical care to the patients.On 2 June 2023, the MoH of the United Republic of Tanzania declared the end of the MVD outbreak. This declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Marburg virus infection) after the last possible exposure to MVD probable or confirmed case.Figure 1: Distribution of MVD cases (confirmed and probable) by date of symptom onset in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 31 May 2023.Figure 2: Map of district reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 31 May 2023.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs, or other body fluids of infected people and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, and clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies involving direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of the Marburg virus.The incubation period varies from 2 to 21 days. Illness caused by the Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset. However, not all cases have haemorrhagic signs, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. Early supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms and co-infections can improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.  This was the first documented outbreak of MVD reported in the United Republic of Tanzania. There is an ongoing outbreak of MVD in Equatorial Guinea (for more information, please see the Disease outbreak news published on 8 May 2023 in Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania).  Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2000 and 1998), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).On 2 June 2023, the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania declared the end of the MVD outbreak that affected Bukoba district in Kagera region.  This was the first documented MVD outbreak in the country.MVD is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality ratios (CFR 24-90%). MVD is caused by the same family (Filoviridae) as Ebola virus disease (EVD) and is clinically similar. In the early course of the disease, clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from other tropical febrile illnesses because of the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral hemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, particularly Ebola diseases, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, and dengue. Epidemiologic features can help differentiate between diseases (i.e., exposure to bats, caves, or mining).Marburg virus has been isolated from fruit bats (Roussettus aegyptiacus) that are present in the United Republic of Tanzania and countries neighboring the affected Kagera region, therefore the same bat species may carry the virus in this region.Based on the available information at the end of MVD outbreak in the United Republic of Tanzania, the risk is considered as low at national level, low at the subregional level, regional level and at the global level.WHO encourages countries to maintain most response activities for three months after the outbreak is declared over. This is to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities would be able to detect it immediately, prevent the disease from spreading again, and ultimately save lives.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce MVD transmission:WHO advises against any international travel and/or trade measures in the United Republic of Tanzania. Citable reference: World Health Organization (2 June 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease - the United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON471Situation at a glanceOn 11 May 2023, the United States of America Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) notified the Mexico General Directorate of Epidemiology (DGE) of five cases with central nervous system infection (CNSI) in the United States of America. All five cases were females with a history of undergoing surgical procedures performed under spinal anaesthesia in Mexico. The surgeries were performed in two private clinics, located in the city of Matamoros, Tamaulipas state, on the border with the USA.Laboratory test results from samples collected from patients in the USA and Mexico were consistent with meningitis caused by pathogenic fungi.Fungal meningitis is rare but can be fatal and requires immediate medical care.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation based on the latest available information.Description of the situationOn 11 May 2023, the US CDC notified the Mexico’s DGE through the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP),  the identification of five female cases with CNSI in the USA, with a history of undergoing surgical procedures performed under spinal anaesthesia in two private clinics in a city in Mexico, bordering the USA.As of 26 May 2023, the health authorities from Mexico and the USA have reported a total of 20 cases presenting with signs and symptoms compatible with CNSI, including two deaths reported by the US CDC. Patients presented to the hospital with symptoms including headache, fever, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, and fainting after receiving surgical procedures in two private clinics located in the city of Matamoros, Tamaulipas state in Mexico, on the border with the USA between January and April 2023.The Mexico Epidemiological Diagnosis and Reference Institute (InDRE per its acronym in Spanish) has received five samples of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that tested positive for a fungus, Fusarium solani by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Additionally, according to the health authorities from the USA, the laboratory results from nine suspected cases were consistent with meningitis, of which two CSF and two blood samples showed elevated levels of (1,3)-beta-D-glucan, a biomarker for fungal infection.  Two pan-fungal PCR tests were negative.According to the investigation performed, a total of 547 people had these procedures  between January and April 2023 in the concerned two private clinics, of whom 304 (56%) reside in Mexico, 237 (43%) in the United States, and one in Canada.Epidemiology of the diseaseSeveral species of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites can cause meningitis, an inflammation of the tissues surrounding the brain and spinal cord. Fungal meningitis can develop after a fungal infection spread from somewhere else in the body to the central nervous system. It can be fatal and requires immediate medical care.  While rare, medical and surgical procedures can lead to fungal meningitis if medical devices or medications are contaminated with fungi, or if proper infection prevention control practices are not taken. This type of healthcare-associated infection can lead to severe illness or death. Healthcare-associated fungal meningitis outbreaks have occurred among patients who received spinal anesthesia.The United States of America and Mexico Health Authorities are investigating additional cases that may be associated with this outbreak in both countries. The response measures include:In the United States of America:In Mexico: Fungal meningitis cases following a medical/surgical procedure are very infrequent and unusual. In 2012, the US CDC investigated a multistate outbreak of fungal meningitis and other infections among patients who received contaminated preservative-free methylprednisolone acetate ( MPA) steroid injections; 753 cases were reported, including 64 deaths in 20 States in the USA.The source, vehicle, and the transmission route for the current outbreak remains unknown, although the investigations are ongoing. A fungal infection is suspected based on preliminary information provided by the health authorities from Mexico and the USA.Each year, more than a million people from the USA participate in medical tourism. In 2017, more than 1.4 million Americans sought health care in a variety of countries around the world. These medical tourists commonly travel to Mexico, Canada, and countries in Central America, South America, and the Caribbean. At present, there is no evidence to suggest any secondary spread from these cases of health care associated fungal meningitis The involved healthcare facilities where the procedures were undertaken have been closed since 13 May. However, there is an ongoing investigation and follow up of people who may have been exposed to fungal infections. This may lead to additional cases being reported until the follow up of people exposed to such procedure is completed.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and review the risk assessment based on the latest available information.As  the outbreak's source is yet to be established, WHO Member States must stay vigilant. It is critically important for affected Member States to identify any possible cases, establish the causal chain, and determine if any substandard/falsified products or procedures could be related. Investigation of these cases will assist in rapid containment at the disease source to prevent additional suspected cases.WHO recommends the continuation of laboratory analyses, case identification and clinical care, follow-up of potentially exposed people, outbreak investigation to identify the agent, the source, the vehicle, and the transmission route, implementation of measures to prevent further infections, and enhancement of Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures.IPC measures in health facilities should be reinforced to prevent healthcare-associated transmission. Attention should be paid to ensure injection safety practices are adhered to, including standards being met for medical device disposal or reprocessing (if reusable). Processes used for the storage, transport, and preparation of sharps, syringes, and vials should be examined to ensure sterility prior to use in local healthcare facilities. Use of multidose vials should be avoided. IPC practices should be reviewed and reinforced in operating theaters to ensure they are adhered to, including appropriate personal protective equipment use, before aseptic procedures, including skin antisepsis for safe administration of spinal anesthesia, as well as ensuring environmental cleaning.WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travellers visiting Mexico. In case of symptoms suggestive of meningitis during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their healthcare provider.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Mexico and the United States of America based on the current information available on this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (1 June 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Outbreak of suspected fungal meningitis associated with surgical procedures performed under spinal anaesthesia – the United States of America and Mexico. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON470  Situation at a glanceOn 5 May 2023, France reported an increase in cases of severe neonatal sepsis associated with Enterovirus (Echovirus-11 (E-11)). A total of nine cases of neonatal sepsis with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure were reported between July 2022 and April 2023 from four hospitals in three regions of France. As of 5 May 2023, seven cases have died and two were still hospitalized in neonatal unit.The current increase in incidence and severity in neonates, associated with a recombinant lineage of E-11 that previously was not detected in France, and is considered unusual due to the extremely rapid deterioration and associated case fatality rate amongst the affected babies.  Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low, despite the concerning nature of the increase.Description of the casesOn 5 May 2023, France reported nine cases of severe neonatal sepsis associated with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure including seven associated deaths. Of these nine cases, eight were preterm (born before 38 weeks of gestation). Four pairs of twins were affected and presented with late-onset neonatal sepsis (occurring after one week of birth to three months).The cases were reported from four hospitals in three regions between July 2022 and April 2023. Of the nine reported cases, six were reported in 2022 (two cases each in July, October, and December) and three were reported in 2023 (one case in January and two cases in April).All cases presented with one or more clinical signs less than seven days after birth, suggesting a mother-to-child transmission route. The clinical presentation of these cases was considered to be atypical due to their extremely rapid deterioration and the associated case fatality rate. As of 5 May 2023, seven cases have died and two were still hospitalized in the neonatal unit; their short-term prognosis is no longer threatened.Enterovirus reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing of all nine cases (including blood samples, throat swabs, nasopharyngeal swabs, cerebrospinal fluid samples, and/or post-mortem biopsies) confirmed the presence of enterovirus, typed as Echovirus-11 (E-11). E-11 maternal infection was confirmed by RT-PCR and enterovirus genotyping by analyzing blood samples from four out of five mothers. All tested mothers presented with gastrointestinal signs or fever within the three days before or at delivery.Sequence analyses of all typed enterovirus infections in 2022 showed the circulation of at least two lineages of recombinant origin, of which the predominant one included all the sequences associated with the nine cases together with sequences associated with non-neonatal or non-severe neonatal infections. Further genetic analyses are ongoing.According to historical data from 2016 to 2021, E-11 represented 6.2% (3 of 48) of reported severe neonatal infections with known enterovirus type while this proportion increased to 55% (11 of 20) in 2022.Epidemiology of diseaseEnteroviruses are a group of viruses that can cause various infectious illnesses and are responsible for annual epidemics. Illness is usually mild but has been found to affect neonates differently and sometimes more severely than older children and adults. There are multiple transmission routes, particularly in the neonatal period, including intrapartum by exposure to maternal blood, secretions, and/or stool, or postnatally from close contacts with infected caregivers. Echovirus 11 (E-11) is a positive-strand RNA virus belonging to the genus Enterovirus of the family Picornaviridae.The infections can cause severe inflammatory illnesses in neonates, including severe acute hepatitis with coagulopathy. On 28 April 2023, the French national reference centre for enteroviruses and parechoviruses informed clinicians and virologists involved in the care of newborns, to reinforce the diagnosis and surveillance of enterovirus infection in neonates with severe sepsis through a professional network. In particular, the message focused on:Continuous information sharing regarding this event among France and other Member States (through the European Non-Polio Enterovirus Network (ENPEN)), the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and WHO is ongoing. To date, no comparable increase of E-11 cases associated with neonatal sepsis has been observed in countries that have reported to the ECDC (Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, Norway, and Spain) in 2022 and 2023.A review of the epidemiological data collected from 2016 to 2022 in France through routine surveillance of enterovirus infections among hospitalized patients showed a significant increase in incidence and mortality for all severe neonatal infections associated with E-11, defined as infections with at least one organ failure and/or requiring admission to intensive care.A total of 443 enterovirus neonatal infections (severe and non-severe types) including seven deaths (case fatality rate, (CFR) 1.6%) were reported in France in 2022. Of these, 72% (n=317) had a known enterovirus type.  E-11 was the predominant circulating enterovirus type (all ages included) and was identified in 30.3% (96 of 317) of neonatal infections (severe and non-severe) with known enterovirus type. It has been continuously detected since June 2022.Of the reported neonatal infections in 2022, 4.5% (22 of 443) were classified as severe. Of these 20 had known enterovirus types. E-11 represented 55% (11 of 20) of these cases as compared to 6.2% (3 of 48) of cases with known enterovirus type out of the total reported severe neonatal infections (n=62) between 2016 to 2021. In 2022, there were seven deaths (case fatality rate, (CFR) 1.6%) out of the cumulative 443 enterovirus neonatal infections recorded in 2022 (six associated with E-11), compared to seven deaths (CFR 0.4%), out of 1774 neonatal infections from 2016 to 2021(none associated with E-11). As mentioned above, there have also been seven deaths so far in 2023.Sequence analyses showed the circulation of at least two lineages of recombinant origin, of which the predominant one included all the sequences associated with the nine severe cases together with sequences associated with non-neonatal or non-severe neonatal infections. This new variant of E-11 had not been observed in France before July 2022, nor elsewhere based on available sequences on Genbank, as of 28 April 2023. As of 5 May 2023, E-11 sequences retrieved from samples collected in 2023 all belong to this predominant lineage. Although higher pathogenicity of this new lineage cannot be excluded, the severity of infections may also be explained by the young age, prematurity, and the absence of maternal immunity. Further analyses are warranted to delineate the characteristics of this recombinant virus.Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low. However, asymptomatic carriage and shedding of infectious viruses are a feature of enterovirus infection. Echovirus infection was confirmed in four out of five mothers by analyzing blood samples three days before or at delivery. There have been previous reports of severe E-11 infection in twin neonates, however, the observation of four sets of twins amongst nine cases is more than expected. As non-polio enterovirus infection is often not a notifiable disease in Member States, additional cases of severe neonatal enterovirus infection may have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported.Non-polio enteroviruses are common and distributed worldwide. Although infections often are asymptomatic, some may present with respiratory tract infections. Symptoms include fever, runny nose, and body weakness. These viruses are also associated with occasional outbreaks in which an unusually high proportion of patients develop clinical disease, sometimes with serious and fatal consequences. Clinicians managing neonates and young infants presenting with circulatory shock should consider an underlying diagnosis of sepsis and perform appropriate diagnostic investigations, including testing for enteroviruses.Health and care workers working with samples suspicious of non-polio enteroviruses should be properly trained to collect, store, and transport various samples. If samples are referred domestically and/or internationally for confirmation, typing, or sequencing purposes, appropriate national and international regulations on the transport of infectious substances should be strictly followed. Laboratories that perform sequencing should consider sharing genetic sequence data through publicly accessible databases.No specific antiviral therapy for echovirus infection is available, and treatment focuses on preventing complications. Health facilities caring for neonate populations in France should familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of enterovirus and maintain vigilance for potential healthcare-associated infection cases and outbreaks in wards providing neonatal care. Healthcare facilities and health and care workers in units working with neonates should implement infection prevention and control measures with a focus on adherence to WHO “Your 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene,” visitor restriction, re-enforcing the importance of cleaning and disinfection of the environment and use of contact precautions when caring for neonates suspected or confirmed to have E-11. For confirmed neonates consider isolation, ensure pacifiers and baby bottles are not shared and educate mothers on personal hygiene and handwashing during change of diapers. WHO provides training for health and care workers on preventing maternal and neonatal sepsis which can be accessed on Open WHO.Citable reference: World Health Organization (31 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Enterovirus Infection – France. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON469Situation at a glanceIn mid-May, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) the detection of avian influenza A(H5) virus in a poultry worker at a farm in England where poultry was infected with high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) viruses. Another detection was reported in a second individual performing culling operations on the farm. Both detections were later confirmed by additional testing as A(H5N1). Both cases were asymptomatic and detected as part of an ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza.All the workers at this farm and their contacts have been identified; none of the contacts have reported symptoms, and no other influenza cases have been identified. The United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has not detected evidence of human-to-human transmission.Based on the available information, WHO considers these as sporadic detections of avian influenza viruses among humans with no evidence of person-to-person transmission to date. Thus, the likelihood of international disease spread through humans is considered to be low.Given the widespread circulation in birds and the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO stresses the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses which may affect human (or animal) health.Description of the situationIn late April, the UKHSA was notified by the Animal and Plant Health Protection Agency (APHA) of an outbreak of HPAI (H5N1) on a poultry farm in England, United Kingdom. The human cases were detected through an ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza.The UKHSA Rapid Investigation Team were deployed to the farm in early May 2023 to recruit exposed participants for the study. Of the 24 eligible persons, one tested positive for influenza A (with no detection of human seasonal subtypes H1 or H3) on the first sample self-taken at the premises. Two further nasopharyngeal samples collected from the same person tested negative for influenza A by a UKHSA regional laboratory and by the UKHSA national influenza reference laboratory. The participant remained clinically asymptomatic throughout.An update from the United Kingdom authorities to WHO in mid-May 2023, notified of an additional case from the same farm as influenza A(H5) positive on two separate samples. This second person was a poultry culler exposed to infected birds at the same farm. The poultry culler worked on the farm in early May using personal protective equipment (PPE). The case was clinically assessed and remains asymptomatic. The case was treated with oseltamivir and was negative on respiratory sampling taken on the last day of isolation.Sequencing later confirmed the virus detected in both individuals as A(H5N1). All samples from these two individuals were negative for seasonal influenza viruses. All other study participants remain well and have tested negative for influenza A on their samples to date. Follow-up of contacts has been completed. The affected farm is one of the first recruited in the ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza.Work to determine whether these are infections or not (i.e., could instead be due to transient mucosal contamination of the nose with virus particles) is underway, though it may be difficult to reach a conclusion.Epidemiology of diseaseThe United Kingdom implemented the following public health measures:Coordination and response: Since late April 2023, the standard measures for control of avian influenza in England were applied in the affected poultry farm. Situational assessment and response to human detection was coordinated by UKHSA and Public Health Scotland and undertaken by local health protection and National Health Service clinical services.Surveillance: A follow-up response including passive and active surveillance of exposed workers was undertaken for the first detection. For the second detected case, close contacts were offered chemoprophylaxis, swabbing, and were requested to self-isolate for ten days since their last exposure, reporting information about their health conditions. This second case was isolated until the negative swab result.Laboratory: Further samples have been obtained from the second case for analysis in a reference laboratory in Scotland. Virus characterization and genomic analysis are in process by the Respiratory Virus Unit, UKHSA/Scottish reference laboratory.Infection prevention and control: In the affected farms, measures related to the control of the outbreak have been undertaken, including on-site slaughter of the birds, the destruction of contaminated materials that could carry the virus, and cleaning and disinfection of the facilities. All participants involved in the culling process wore personal protective equipment.As per standard practice for confirmed infected poultry premises in the United Kingdom, a ten-kilometre surveillance zone, and a three-kilometre protection zone were declared by the United Kingdom Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs around the infected premises. The zone will remain in place for at least 21 days after preliminary cleansing and disinfection completion. It will not be lifted until surveillance activities, including clinical inspections of all commercial premises in the zone, have been undertaken.Based on the available information, WHO assesses that the risk for the general population posed by this virus is low, and for occupationally exposed persons it is low to moderate.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade for the United Kingdom based on available information on this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (30 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Avian Influenza A (H5N1) – United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON468This Disease Outbreak News was first published on 16 May 2023 and later updated on 17 May 2023 to correct the number of cases, deaths, and the number of cases with PCR testing.Situation at a glanceOn 5 April 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for the United Kingdom informed WHO of an increase in severe myocarditis in neonates associated with enterovirus infection in Wales. Between June 2022 and April 2023, ten hospitalised neonates with a positive enterovirus Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test were found to have myocarditis. Seven of the ten cases had further subtyping, with either coxsackie B3 or coxsackie B4 identified. As of 5 May 2023, one patient was still hospitalised, and one had died.Although enterovirus infections are common in neonates and young infants, the reported increase in myocarditis with severe outcomes in neonates and infants associated with enterovirus infection is unusual.Description of the situationOn 5 April 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for the United Kingdom informed WHO of an increase in severe myocarditis in neonates and infants associated with enterovirus infection in Wales.Between June 2022 and April 2023, ten neonates, under 28 days of age, presented with a picture consistent with  myocarditis and a positive enterovirus PCR. Seven cases were treated in intensive care, and one case died before transfer to tertiary care. Cases presented with features of sepsis, myocarditis, or in cardiorespiratory arrest. The peak incidence of cases was in November 2022, with sporadic cases in other months.Enterovirus PCR testing of all ten cases (with either blood, throat swab, nose swab, nasopharyngeal aspirate or cerebrospinal fluid samples) confirmed the presence of an enterovirus, subtyping (where available) to either coxsackie B3 or coxsackie B4.Critical care support including intubation, ventilation and circulatory support was given to the patients who went to intensive care.As of 5 May 2023, one patient was still hospitalised and one had died.The reported increase in severe myocarditis in neonates and infants associated with enterovirus infection is unusual. In the tertiary hospital covering the South Wales region, two other similar cases have been identified in the 6 years prior to June 2022.A further five cases have been identified over the same period in the Southwest of England. No additional information is currently available about these cases. Details of five of the cases from South Wales and three of the additional cases from Southwest England have recently been published (Ng et al., 2023).Epidemiology of Myocarditis (acute infective)Myocarditis is an inflammation of the heart muscle (myocardium). The most common cause of myocarditis is viral infection (e.g., Enteroviruses), but it can also be caused by a bacterial infection, a reaction to a drug or an autoimmune disease. Myocarditis symptoms include new and persistent chest pain, shortness of breath and heart palpitations (racing or pounding heartbeat).Enteroviruses can cause a number of infectious illnesses and are responsible for annual epidemics. These are usually mild but have been found to affect neonates differently, and often more severely, than older children. There are multiple transmission routes, particularly in the neonatal period. The reported incident represents an increase in both the number and severity of enterovirus (coxsackieviruses) infections in infants under the age of one month. There is increased morbidity and mortality associated with the current incident. On 28 February 2023, pediatricians in the South Wales region were alerted about the recent cases, with advice to consider myocarditis in infants and neonates presenting in shock. A briefing note to clinicians, microbiologists, health boards and public health teams was sent from Public Health Wales on 3 May 2023, following an incident meeting in Wales on 26 April 2023.An Incident Management Team set up by the United Kingdom authorities are reviewing the evidence from all English Regions and United Kingdom countries and agree on the next steps for response. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing.According to the authorities of the United Kingdom, a review of past data from the previous six years from the same tertiary care centre in Wales, United Kingdom, has identified only two similar cases prior to June 2022 (which may or may not be linked to the current incident).Based on the limited information available at this point, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low. However, asymptomatic carriage and shedding of infectious virus is a feature of enterovirus infection and there was little evidence in this case series of maternal infection prior to or during delivery. As enterovirus infection is often not among the notifiable diseases in Member States, additional cases of severe, neonatal enterovirus infections might have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported elsewhere.Non-polio enteroviruses are common and distributed worldwide. Although infections often are asymptomatic, others present with mild to moderate respiratory tract infections. Symptoms include fever, runny nose and body weakness. These viruses are also associated with occasional outbreaks in which an unusually high proportion of patients develop clinical disease, sometimes with serious and fatal consequences – in this instance myocarditis. Clinicians seeing infants and neonates presenting in shock may consider a diagnosis of myocarditis and consider testing for enteroviruses.No specific antiviral therapy is available, and treatment focuses on prevention of complications. As there is no vaccine for this virus, control measures during outbreaks are focused on classical hygiene measures including frequent handwashing and disinfection of soiled clothing and surfaces. In certain situations, it may be advisable to close child-care facilities and schools to reduce the intensity of transmission.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to United Kingdom based on the information available for this event. Citable reference: World Health Organization (17 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Myocarditis (acute infective) – United Kingdom. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON465 Description of the situationEquatorial Guinea:Figure 5: Map of district reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 30 April 2023.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs, or other bodily fluids of infected people and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, and clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies involving direct contact with the deceased's body can also contribute to the transmission of the Marburg virus.In Equatorial Guinea:In the United Republic of Tanzania:Once all contacts have completed their 21-day period, the date of last possible exposure to a MVD probable or confirmed case can be set, based on two possible scenarios:  Citable reference: World Health Organization (8 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease - Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON467 1.   https://alima.ngo/2022/12/08/cube/ Situation at a glanceOn 14 April 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of South Sudan declared an outbreak of the hepatitis E Virus (HEV) in Wau city, the capital of Western Bahr el-Ghazal state and one of the largest cities in South Sudan. Between 23 March 2023 and 13 April 2023, a total of 91 HEV suspected cases have been reported from Wau, of which 35 are confirmed; there have been five deaths reported (case fatality ratio [CFR] 5.5%). A multidisciplinary national rapid response team has been deployed by the MoH, supported by WHO, to conduct an epidemiological investigation, determine the extent of the outbreak, identify exposures or risk factors to prevent further spread and implement appropriate preventive measures. HEV is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, mainly through contaminated water. Hepatitis E is found worldwide and is common in developing countries with inadequate water supply, limited access to adequate clean drinking water, poor environmental sanitation, personal hygiene, and limited health services, or areas of humanitarian emergencies. Cases of the hepatitis E virus have been reported in the Bentiu camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in South Sudan since 2018, with seasonal upsurges reported yearly, particularly during the rainy season due to floods leading to contamination of drinking water. There is a risk of international spread of the disease as South Sudan shares borders with Sudan and Ethiopia, with substantial traffic between them. The situation is further aggravated by the highly mobile IDP and refugee population, mainly from Rubkona county, Unity State, where the Bentiu IDP camp is located. Description of the outbreakOn 14 April 2023, the Ministry of Health of South Sudan declared an outbreak of the hepatitis E Virus in Wau city, the capital of Western Bahr el-Ghazal State.On 22 March 2023, the MoH was notified of a cluster of cases with jaundice and several deaths. In response, the MoH, supported by WHO, immediately deployed a multidisciplinary national rapid response team to conduct an epidemiological investigation, characterize the event, determine its magnitude, and identify exposures or risk factors to guide control and prevention measures.Between 23 March 2023 and 13 April 2023, a total of 91 suspected cases of hepatitis E virus were reported and five were fatal (CFR 5.5%). A total of 44 blood samples were collected and tested for HEV IgM antibodies, of which 79% (n = 35) were confirmed. Most cases (93%) have been reported from Nazareth village in Wau South. The median age of cases is 20 years (range 2 – 71 years). Males are most affected, accounting for 74% of all reported cases.  To validate the positive results, 24 samples were shipped to the Uganda Virus Research Institute and Medical Research Council virology laboratory in Uganda on 17 April 2023. On 24 April 2023, ten of the 24 samples tested positive for HEV by real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Further detailed investigation and sequencing of samples are ongoing.Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) cases have been consistently reported in South Sudan since 2018, with recurrent outbreaks in Bentiu, Rubkona county, in the Unity state (central-north part of South Sudan), where the Bentiu IDP camp with around 170 000 individuals is located.Between 2018 and 29 November 2021, a total of 1707 suspected cases, including 104 confirmed and 12 deaths (five deaths in 2021 alone) were reported in the country. All confirmed cases were tested by PCR at the Uganda Virus Research Institute.In 2022, 2110 cases were reported in Bentiu IDP camp, Unity state. Following the continued detection of cases in March, April, and October 2022, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) and the MoH jointly carried out the first hepatitis E vaccination campaign in Bentiu IDP camp. Around 25 000 people, including pregnant women, received the vaccine out of around 170 000 people in the camp. As of 19 March 2023, 4009 cases of hepatitis E, including 27 deaths (CFR: 1%) have been reported from Bentiu IDP camp. Epidemiology of diseaseHepatitis E is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis E virus (HEV). Hepatitis E is found worldwide and is common in developing countries with limited access to adequate clean drinking water, poor sanitation and personal hygiene, limited health services or in areas of humanitarian emergencies. The hepatitis E virus is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, mainly through contaminated water. The risk factors for hepatitis E are related to poor sanitation conditions, allowing the viruses excreted in the feces of infected subjects to reach water intended for human consumption. The infection resolves spontaneously in 2-6 weeks with a 0.5-4% lethality. Fulminant hepatitis, severe liver function impairment caused by HEV, is more common in pregnancy. Pregnant women, especially in their second and third trimesters, are at increased risk of acute liver failure, fetal loss, and mortality: the case-fatality rate can be as high as 20-25% in women in the last trimester of pregnancy. Globally, most human infections with HEV are attributed to genotypes 1 and 2, which primarily affect humans in developing countries where contamination of drinking water and lack of adequate sanitation are common, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. The South Sudan MoH continues to work with WHO and partners to ensure response efforts are fully implemented and the people of South Sudan are protected from the risk of HEV. The MoH has initiated the following key response actions:Leadership and coordinationWASHSurveillance and case managementCases of hepatitis E virus have been detected in South Sudan and the Bentiu IDP camp since 2018. If the WASH conditions are not improved, the potential risk to human health is high, especially for pregnant women and infants, as mother-to-infant transmission of HEV (during the third trimester of gestation) has been reported.  The risk at the national level is assessed as high due to:The overall risk at the regional level is considered moderate due to the risk of disease spread between the mobile IDP populations and refugees who cross the borders between South Sudan, Sudan, and Ethiopia. In 2018, genomic sequencing of isolates from HEV cases reported in Bentiu IDP camp showed HEV genotype 1, closely related to strains isolated in the Chad basin and Northern Uganda. This highlights the risk of extensive regional spread in the current context that involves IDPs, refugees, and other populations of humanitarian concern.  At the global level, the risk is low. Prevention is the most effective approach against this disease. At the community level, the most important interventions to reduce HEV transmission are safe drinking water, quality standards for public water supplies, and adequate sanitation. At the individual level, infectious risks can be reduced by maintaining hygiene practices such as washing hands with clean water and soap, especially before handling food, avoiding consumption of water and/or ice of unknown purity, and following WHO hygiene practices for food safety. To prevent the spread of acute hepatitis E, WHO recommends improving access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation. The drinking water quality should be regularly monitored in neighborhoods affected by this epidemic. Coverage of latrines and drinking water sources should be increased to prevent open defecation and to ensure hand hygiene.Health promotion and prevention activities, as well as ensuring early, appropriate, and equitable healthcare services to combat hepatitis E epidemics, can help improve public health outcomes, especially in resource-limited settings. Since the incubation period for hepatitis E ranges from two to 10 weeks, cases may continue to occur up to 10 weeks after measures to ensure safe water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion have been adopted. Interventions must continue to target vulnerable populations by establishing or strengthening antenatal diagnosis for pregnant women with symptoms, improving the population's hygiene conditions, strengthening national capacities for diagnosis and clinical case management, and cross-border collaboration with neighbouring countries. There is no specific treatment for the clinical management of patients. There may be specific situations, such as outbreaks, where the risk of hepatitis E or its complications or mortality is particularly high. The recombinant hepatitis E vaccine, Hecolin, has been developed for commercialization and licensed in China and Pakistan. While WHO does not recommend the introduction of the vaccine as part of national routine population immunization programs, WHO recommends that national authorities consider using the vaccine in outbreak settings, including in populations at high risk, such as pregnant women.Citable reference: World Health Organization (5 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Acute Hepatitis E – South Sudan. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON466 Situation at a glanceMeasles is endemic in Ethiopia, with cases reported every year.  Between 12 August 2021 and 1 May 2023, 16 814 laboratory-confirmed measles cases and 182 deaths – with a Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) of 1.1% - have been reported nationally.From 2021, the annual number of confirmed measles cases has increased significantly, from 1953 in 2021 to 9291(˃375%) in 2022 and 6933 in 2023 as of 1 May. Thus, there was, an almost five-fold increase in confirmed measles cases between 2021 and 2022.Low population immunity, combined with concurrent epidemics, conflict, forced displacement, and other humanitarian crises that disrupt childhood vaccinations, are some factors that may explain the increases.Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by measles virus and it is normally passed through direct contact and through the air. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. It can lead to major epidemics with significant illness and death, especially among vulnerable people, such as young children. In 2022, 45% of all cases were children under 5 years of age.There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, but an effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. A 95% population vaccination coverage is required to stop measles circulation.Description of the situationSince 12 August 2021, all 13 Regional Health Bureaus in Ethiopia have received reports of suspected measles cases in either host communities, displaced populations, or refugees. Since then, and as of 1 May 2023, 16 814 laboratory-confirmed measles cases and 182 deaths, with a CFR of 1.1% have been reported nationally.From 2021, the annual number of confirmed measles cases has increased significantly, from 1953 in 2021 to 9291(+375%) in 2022, and 6933 so far in 2023 as of 1 May. Thus, there was, a nearly five-fold increase in confirmed measles cases between 2021 and 2022.There are active measles outbreaks reported in 44 woredas/districts from eight regions: Afar, Amhara, Harari, Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR), South West Ethiopia Peoples’ Region (SWEPR), Tigray and Somali. The number of measles-affected woredas was 52 (5% of the country’s 1080 woredas) in 2021 and 125 (12%) in 2022.Between 1 January to 2 April 2023, the Somali region reported 56 laboratory-confirmed and 364 epidemiologically linked measles cases. In 2022, the nationwide measles incidence rate was 82 cases per one million population. The highest reported rates were in the Somali region, which reported 540 cases per one million population. The lack of reporting associated with the crisis in Northern Ethiopia (Tigray) hampers an adequate assessment of the measles situation.Amongst the confirmed measles cases, only 36% have received one dose or more of the measles-containing vaccine (MCV). According to WHO UNICEF Estimates of National Immunization Coverage (WUENIC) low population immunity (MCV1 and MCV2 coverage in 2021 was estimated at 54% and 46% respectively), combined with concurrent epidemics, conflict, forced displacement, and other humanitarian crises that disrupt childhood vaccinations, are some of the risk factors identified for the increased spread of the disease. Furthermore, cultural beliefs, insufficient awareness, and behavioral characteristics can be a barrier to seeking early treatment and making use of other management strategies for disease management.The country faces various challenges that could exacerbate the situation further, including high rates of malnutrition (nutritional screening during measles SIAs showed that 0.6% of children had severe acute malnutrition 4.7% had global acute malnutrition (GAM) based on over 15,000 children screened) and, a lack of access to health care in conflict-affected areas increasing the risk of severe disease, displacement and crowded conditions poor hygiene and sanitation access and practices increasing the risk of interpersonal spread. According to the latest predictions by the IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC) and National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) of the Greater Horn of Africa (GHA), Additionally, certain regions affected by drought, such as SNNPR, Oromia, Somali, Afar, and SWEPR, have also reported floods, and around 1.7 million people are at risk of flooding, according to preparedness plans, further risking displacement, disruption of vaccination, and a risk of having people move to crowded settlements increasing the risk of measles circulation.Figure 1. Total number of measles cases reported by week of onset of symptoms in Ethiopia. 12 August 2021 – 1 May 2023Figure 2. Woredas reporting active measles outbreaks in Ethiopia from 12 August 2021 to 30 April 2023 Note: Active outbreak: Three or more measles IgM+ cases reported within one month. Controlled outbreak: No new case reported for the last 30 days after onset of the last case reported.Epidemiology of diseaseMeasles is caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. Measles is a human disease and is not known to occur in animals. It can lead to major epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially among vulnerable people. Among young and malnourished children, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, measles can cause serious complications, including ear infection, severe diarrhoea, blindness, encephalitis, pneumonia, and death.Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse rapidly when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to two hours. A patient is infectious from four days before the start of the characteristic morbilliform rash, to four or five days after its appearance. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles; most people recover within 2-3 weeks.An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine’s first dose (MCV1) is given at nine months, while the second dose of the measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months. However, their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status. The following measures have been undertaken in the country to control the outbreak:Measles is a highly contagious disease that occurs seasonally in endemic areas. Measles is still common in many developing countries, particularly in parts of Africa and Asia. Over 95% of measles deaths occur in countries with low per capita incomes and weak health infrastructures. Measles remains an important cause of death among young children globally, despite a safe and effective vaccine being available.There are several challenges that Ethiopia is facing in its efforts to increase national childhood vaccination coverage: conflict, population movement, and an insufficient stock of vaccines at the national level. These challenges are expected to fuel outbreaks and increase the number of cases.The overall risk at the national level is assessed as high due to the following factors:At the regional level, the overall risk is assessed as moderate due to the following factors:The risk has been assessed as low at global level.The key public health strategies to reduce disease burden and transmission include routine vaccination of children against measles, combined with periodic intensification of routine immunization activities (PIRI) and mass immunization campaigns in countries with high morbidity and mortality rates.There is no specific treatment for measles. Case management of measles focuses on supportive care as well as the prevention and treatment of measles complications and secondary infections. Since measles is highly contagious, patient isolation is important to prevent the further spread of the virus.Oral rehydration salts should be used as needed to prevent dehydration. All children diagnosed with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A oral supplements, given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A; 50 000 international units (IU) should be given to infants aged < 6 months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6-11 months and 200 000 IU to children aged 12 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk of malnutrition due to diarrhoea, vomiting and poor appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should be encouraged where appropriate.In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individuals, the measles vaccine may be administered within 72 hours of exposure to the measles virus to protect against disease. If the disease does subsequently develop, symptoms are usually less severe, and the duration of illness may be shortened.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Ethiopia.Citable reference: World Health Organization (4 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles – Ethiopia. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON460 Situation at a glanceNigeria is currently experiencing a large outbreak of Lassa fever, with 4702 suspected cases, five probable cases, and 877 confirmed cases between epidemiological weeks 1 and 15 of 2023 (week ending 16 April). Among confirmed cases, there have been 152 deaths (CFR 17%). Lassa fever is endemic in Nigeria and parts of West Africa where the multimammate rat, the main reservoir of the Lassa virus, is common.Responding to the current outbreak is challenging due to the need to respond to multiple emergencies simultaneously.The symptoms of Lassa fever vary widely, and diagnosis can be difficult. Most cases (∼ 80%) are asymptomatic or mild. Still, the infection can result in severe illness and multiple organ dysfunction with or without haemorrhage. Laboratory testing is therefore needed to confirm the diagnosis.Laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported in states bordering Cameroon (Adamawa, Benue, Cross Rivers, and Taraba) and states bordering Benin (Oyo and Niger). The overall regional and global risks are considered low because the primary mode of transmission of Lassa fever is through contact with food or household items contaminated with rat excreta. The rate of human-to-human transmission is low.Description of the situationNigeria is experiencing a large outbreak of Lassa fever, with 4702 suspected cases, five probable cases, and 877 confirmed cases between epidemiological weeks 1 and 15 of 2023 (week ending 16 April). Among confirmed cases, there have been 152 deaths (CFR 17%). This is a 20% increase in confirmed cases in comparison with those reported during the same period in 2022 (733).Cases have been reported from 101 local government areas (LGAs), in 26 out of 36 states, including the Federal Capital Territory (FCT). A high proportion of confirmed cases (72%) are concentrated in three states: Ondo (32%), Edo (29%) and Bauchi (11%). Laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported in states bordering Cameroon (Adamawa, Benue, Cross Rivers, and Taraba) and states bordering Benin (Oyo and Niger).Epidemiology of diseaseLassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease caused by the Lassa virus. It is primarily transmitted to humans either through direct contact with infected Mastomys rodents, or through food or household items contaminated with the urine or faeces of infected rodents. Consequently, the virus is transmitted to humans through cuts and scratches or inhaled via dust particles in the air. Human-to-human transmission can occur through direct contact with an infected person's blood or bodily fluids, but this is rare. Lassa fever can spread in healthcare settings without early recognition and treatment and without adequate infection prevention and control (IPC) measures.Most cases (∼ 80%) are asymptomatic or mild, but the virus can cause severe disease in the remaining 20% of patients, sometimes associated with multiple organ dysfunction with or without haemorrhage. Lassa fever is difficult to diagnose without proper laboratory tests because it can present with various symptoms, ranging from no symptoms to multiple organ failure and death. The case fatality rate is usually between 1% and 15% in patients hospitalized with severe disease. The disease is particularly severe in late pregnancy, with maternal death and/or fetal loss occurring in the third trimester in over 80% of cases. Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment is critical and improves survival. The antiviral ribavirin has been used to treat Lassa fever but its efficacy is unproven. There is currently no vaccine that protects against Lassa fever.The disease was first identified in Nigeria in Borno State in 1969 and is endemic in Nigeria. Transmission occurs throughout the year. However, large seasonal outbreaks occur during the dry season, typically from December to April. During epidemiological weeks 1 to 15 of 2023, 42 cases were reported among healthcare workers across 11 states. In week 15 of 2023 (10-16 April), 141 new suspected cases, nine new confirmed cases, and one new confirmed death were reported (CFR 11%).  Responding to the current outbreak is challenging due to the need to respond to multiple emergencies simultaneously. These include outbreaks of COVID-19, diphtheria, meningitis, measles, and cholera, and ongoing humanitarian crises. In addition, the country is dealing with security challenges that affect the timeliness of the response.The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) and health authorities of affected states are leading the response to the outbreak. An NCDC Emergency Operations Center (EOC) was activated on 28 January 2023 and Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) have been deployed to the states of Bauchi, Benue, Ebonyi, Edo, Ondo, and Taraba.  To improve the response to Lassa fever outbreaks in Nigeria, the NCDC has developed a national action plan, with WHO and other partners, to prevent and control Lassa fever outbreaks. This plan focuses on strengthening surveillance activities, improving and expanding national laboratory capacity, increasing public awareness, and improving the availability of treatment and care for patients. Lassa fever is an acute viral hemorrhagic fever endemic to West Africa. Confirmed outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Guinea, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone, Togo and Nigeria. In some regions, Mastomys rodents are consumed as food. Although Nigeria is an endemic country for Lassa fever and has developed capacity to manage Lassa fever outbreaks, the current overall risk at the national level is considered high due to several factors:The overall regional and global risks are considered low because the primary mode of transmission of Lassa fever is zoonotic and the rate of human-to-human transmission is low. Prevention of Lassa fever requires the promotion of good community hygiene to prevent rodents from entering homes. Effective measures include storing grain and other food in rodent-proof containers, disposing of garbage away from homes, keeping homes clean, and keeping cats in the home. In healthcare settings, staff should always follow standard precautions for the prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections when caring for patients, regardless of the presumed diagnosis. These precautions include hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, personal protective equipment against splashes or other contact with contaminated materials, injection safety, and safe burial rites. Healthcare workers caring for suspected or confirmed cases of Lassa fever should take additional infection control measures to avoid contact with the patient's blood or body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. When in close contact with patients (within one metre), healthcare workers should wear: face protection (face shield or surgical mask and goggles); a clean, non-sterile, long-sleeved gown; and gloves (sterile for certain medical procedures).No vaccine for Lassa fever is currently available for use in humans. The antiviral drug ribavirin may be an effective treatment for Lassa fever if given early on in the course of the illness, but data are inconsistent. There is no evidence to support the role of ribavirin as post-exposure prophylactic treatment for Lassa fever. WHO continues to advise all countries where Lassa fever is endemic to improve early case detection and treatment to reduce fatalities. WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Nigeria based on the information in this report.Citable reference: World Health Organization (1 May 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Lassa Fever – Nigeria. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON463Situation at a glanceSince 2022, Indonesia has recorded an increase in suspected and confirmed measles cases compared to previous years.  Between 1 January and 3 April 2023, a total of 2161 suspected measles cases (848 laboratory-confirmed and 1313 clinically compatible [suspected]) have been reported across 18 of 38 provinces in Indonesia, primarily from the provinces of West Java (796 cases), Central Papua (770 cases), and Banten (197 cases).Measles is endemic in Indonesia and is reported every year. However, in 2022 and 2023, there has been a significant increase in the number of confirmed cases, as compared to those reported annually since 2018: there were 920 reported cases in 2018, 639 in 2019, 310 in 2020, and 132 in 2021.The current outbreak is characterized by suboptimal population immunity, including children without measles vaccination. Supplemental immunization activity (SIA) was conducted in 2022, targeting children <15 years old in high-risk provinces (Aceh, North Sumatera, Riau, Riau Islands, and West Sumatera), 9 – 59 months old in provinces in Java-Bali, and 9 months to 12 years old in the remaining provinces, with efforts to strengthen routine immunization and catch-up activities ongoing to address the population immunity gaps.Description of the situationBetween 1 January and 3 April 2023, a total of 2161 measles cases (848 laboratory-confirmed and 1313 clinically compatible [suspected]) have been reported across 18 of 38 provinces in Indonesia, primarily from the provinces of West Java (796 cases), Central Papua (770 cases), and Banten (197 cases).In 2022, a total of 4845 laboratory-confirmed measles cases and six deaths (CFR 0.1%) were reported across 32 of the 38 provinces. The provinces mainly affected were Aceh (978 cases), West Sumatra (859 cases), Riau (500 cases), and East Java (459 cases). Annual trend analysis shows the number of cases reported annually in 2022 and currently in 2023 is higher than usual: there were 920 cases in 2018, 639 cases in 2019, 310 cases in 2020, and 132 cases in 2021 (Figure 1).Figure 1: Number of measles cases reported by month of onset of symptoms and confirmation category. Indonesia. January 2019 – March 2023.Source: Indonesia Ministry of HealthIn 2022, among the 4845 confirmed measles cases with available age information, 93% (4502) were between 1 and 14 years old. However, a few cases have also been observed in the older age group, with at least 41 cases reported among people over 40. Among the confirmed cases, 67% had not received any dose of measles-containing vaccine (MCV), 6% had received one dose, 7% had received both doses, and vaccination history was unknown for 21 % (991) of confirmed cases (Figure 3).In 2023, among the 2076 confirmed cases with available age information, 95% (1978) were between 1 and 14 years of age. Among the confirmed cases, 75% had not received any dose of MCV, while 11% had received one dose, 10% had received both doses, and vaccination history was unknown for 3%. Among these 2076 cases, 100% (212) of those younger than 9 months old, 87% (47) 9-12 months, and 66% (1303) of those aged 1-14 years had not received any dose of MCV (Figure 2).Figure 2: Percentage of vaccination coverage among confirmed measles cases by age group, 1 January to 3 April 2023. Indonesia. (n=2138)Source: Indonesia Ministry of HealthThe current outbreak is mainly characterized by suboptimal population immunity, as evidenced by the increased gap in immunity (Figure 2). According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Reporting Form (JRF), the vaccination coverage in Indonesia in 2020 was 87% for measles-containing-vaccine first-dose (MCV1) and only 65% for measles-containing-vaccine second dose (MCV2). In 2021, national coverage of MCV1 was 87%, and MCV2 was 59%, with variation in administrative vaccination coverage at the sub-national level; these data indicate a very high number of children are susceptible to measles infection.Epidemiology of measlesMeasles is a human disease caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. It can lead to major epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially among vulnerable people. Among young and malnourished children, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, measles can cause serious complications, including severe diarrhea, blindness, encephalitis, pneumonia, and death.Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse rapidly when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains contagious in the air or on contaminated surfaces for up to two hours. A patient is infectious from four days before the start of the rash to four days after its appearance. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, but most people recover within 2-3 weeks.An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The MCV1 is given at the age of nine months, while the MCV2 is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months. However, their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.Several measles outbreaks have been reported in Indonesia between 2011 to 2023. One of the biggest outbreaks occurred in East Java province in 2016 where 3765 cases were reported, associated with low vaccination coverage levels.While measles is endemic in Indonesia and is reported yearly, the magnitude and extent of this outbreak is high compared to previous years. Based on the current data and available information, the overall risk of measles at the national level is assessed as high for the following reasons: Measles is preventable by vaccination, which provides lifelong immunity in most recipients. In countries with low vaccination coverage, epidemics may occur every two to three years. However, their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population's immunity status.The measles vaccine has been in use for nearly 60 years. It is safe, effective, and inexpensive. Vaccination is recommended for all susceptible children and adults for whom the vaccine is not contraindicated. National immunization programs must ensure the safe provision of immunization services that can reach all children with two doses of the measles vaccine. Routine measles vaccination for children and mass immunization campaigns in countries with high case and death rates are key public health strategies to reduce global measles deaths.WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV vaccine and strengthening integrated epidemiological surveillance of measles and rubella to achieve timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities. WHO continues to strengthen the global laboratory network to ensure timely diagnosis of measles and track the international spread of the measles viruses to allow a more coordinated country approach in targeting vaccination activities and reducing deaths from this vaccine-preventable disease.It is critical to quickly recognize and treat measles complications to reduce the disease’s severity and mortality. Severe complications from measles can be reduced through supportive care that ensures good nutrition, adequate fluid intake, and treatment of dehydration with WHO-recommended oral rehydration solution. This solution replaces fluids and other essential elements lost through diarrhoea or vomiting. Antibiotics should be prescribed to treat eye and ear infections and pneumonia.While there is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, prompt vitamin A in therapeutic doses is recommended to reduce complications and mortality among children infected with measles. Two doses of vitamin A oral supplements should be given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A: 50 000 IU should be given to infants aged < 6 months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6-11 months, and 200 000 IU to children aged 12-59 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Indonesia based on the information presented in this report.Citable reference: World Health Organization (28 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles –Indonesia. Available at  https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON462 Situation at a glanceSince the beginning of 2023, 557 confirmed cases of diphtheria have been detected in Nigeria, affecting 21 of the 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory.In December 2022, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) was notified of suspected diphtheria outbreaks in Kano and Lagos States. From 14 May 2022 to 9 April 2023, 1439 suspected cases have been reported, of which 557 (39%) have been confirmed, including 73 deaths among the confirmed cases (case fatality ratio of 13%). Nigeria has previously reported diphtheria outbreaks, with the most significant reported in 2011 affecting the rural areas of Borno State, in the northeast of the country. Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease which spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups, however unimmunized children are particular at risk. It is potentially fatal.The disease can be treated by administering diphtheria antitoxin as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has reduced the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically.Description of the situationThe Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) was notified of suspected diphtheria outbreaks in Kano and Lagos States on 1 December 2022. In January 2023, the number of confirmed cases increased, peaking at over 150 cases in week 4 of 2023 (ending 28 January); since then, a weekly decreasing trend has been observed. From 14 May 2022 to 9 April 2023, 1439, suspected diphtheria cases were reported from 21 states in Nigeria, with the majority (83%) of cases reported from Kano (1188), Yobe (97), Katsina (61), Lagos (25), Sokoto (14) and Zamfara (13). Of the 1439 suspected cases, 557 (39%) were confirmed (51 laboratory-confirmed, 504 clinically compatible and two epidemiologically linked), 483 (34%) were discarded, and 399 (28%) are pending classification. Laboratory-confirmed cases were reported from Kano (45), Lagos (3), Kaduna (1), Katsina (1), and Osun (1) states. Among the 557 confirmed cases, 73 deaths were recorded, for a CFR of 13%. The CFR has dropped significantly since the beginning of the outbreak due to, among other factors, increased access to diphtheria antitoxin (DAT).Nigeria had recorded diphtheria outbreaks in the past. The most significant outbreak reported was between February and November 2011 in the rural areas of Borno State, north-eastern Nigeria, where 98 cases were reported. Figure 1: Epidemic curve of diphtheria cases by year/epi-week in Nigeria, epi-week 19 2022 – epi-week 14 2023Figure 2: Distribution of Diphtheria cases by state in Nigeria from Epi week 19, 2022 to Epi week 14, 2023Epidemiology of DiphtheriaDiphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused by exotoxin-producing Corynebacterium diphtheriae It spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups, however unimmunized children are particular at risk. It is potentially fatal.  Symptoms often come on gradually, beginning with a sore throat and fever. In severe cases, the bacteria produce a poison (toxin) that causes a thick grey or white patch at the back of throat. This can block the airways, making it hard to breathe or swallow, and also creates a barking cough. The neck may swell in part due to enlarged lymph nodes. Treatment involves administering diphtheria antitoxin as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has reduced the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically. Diphtheria is fatal in 5 - 10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. However, in settings with poor access to diphtheria antitoxin, the CFR can be as high as 40%. Diphtheria cases are under-reported in Nigeria, with few reports of outbreaks in the past. The last outbreak was reported between February and November 2011 in the village of Kimba and its surrounding settlements in Borno State, north-eastern Nigeria, where 98 cases were reported. The diphtheria toxoid-containing vaccine third dose coverage in Nigeria is suboptimal. According to the 2021 Nigeria Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) and National Immunization Coverage Survey (NICS), the third dose of pentavalent vaccine coverage was 57% in 2021.The country is currently faced with several public health emergencies such as Lassa fever, cholera, mpox, meningitis and a humanitarian emergency in the northeast of the country. Due to insecurity, especially in north-eastern Nigeria, vaccination coverage remains suboptimal, especially in the areas controlled by non-state armed groups. Therefore, the outbreak of diphtheria further complicates and strains the already overstretched resources. The global supply of diphtheria antitoxin (DAT) is limited, and this may affect the availability of the required doses in a timely manner.The overall risk of diphtheria in Nigeria was assessed as high at the national level, low at the regional level, and low at the global level.Epidemiological surveillance ensuring early detection of diphtheria outbreaks should be in place in all countries, and all countries should have access to laboratory facilities that allow for the reliable identification of toxigenic C. diphtheriae. For the adequate medical management of cases, sufficient quantities of diphtheria antitoxin should be available nationally or regionally.WHO recommends early reporting and management of suspected diphtheria cases to initiate timely treatment of cases and follow-up of contacts and ensure the supply of diphtheria antitoxin. Case management should be carried out following the WHO guideline and involve administering antitoxin to neutralize the toxin and antibiotics to kill the bacteria, reducing complication and mortality.  As vaccination is key to preventing cases and outbreaks, high-risk populations such as children under five years of age, schoolchildren, close contact of diphtheria cases, and healthcare workers, should be vaccinated with diphtheria-containing vaccines on a priority basis. A coordinated response and community engagement can support control of the ongoing outbreak.Although travellers do not have a special risk of diphtheria infection, it is recommended that national authorities remind travellers going to areas with diphtheria outbreaks to be appropriately vaccinated in accordance with their national vaccination scheme. A booster dose is recommended if more than five years have passed since the last dose.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Nigeria based on the information available for this event. Situation at a glanceBetween 1 October 2022 and 16 April 2023, Nigeria reported a total of 1686 suspected cases of meningitis, including 124 deaths, for a case fatality ratio (CFR) of 7%.Meningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. It is a devastating disease and a major public health challenge. Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus), Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus), Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococcus) are the main causative agents for meningitis. Vaccines can help prevent meningococcal disease.Description of the situationFrom 1 October 2022 to 16 April 2023, a total of 1686 suspected cases, 532 confirmed cases and 124 deaths (CFR: 7%) have been reported from 81 local government areas (LGAs) in 22 out of 36 administrative states, including the Federal Capital Territory (FCT), in Nigeria. Males account for 57% (n = 961) of total suspected cases. The highest proportion of reported cases is among children aged 1 to 15 years. Jigawa state accounts for 74% (n = 1252) of all suspected cases, and this state borders the Zinder region in Niger, where a meningitis outbreak has been reported since October 2022.A total of 481 cerebrospinal fluid samples were collected from patients in 18 states. Out of these samples, 247 tested positive for bacterial infection by PCR test. Among the positive cases, 226 (91%) were caused by Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C (NmC), while 13 cases (5.4%) were caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, and only one case (0.4%) by Haemophilus influenzae. For 232 samples the result was negative, and for two the result is pending. In the last five weeks alone (epidemiological weeks 11-15), 41 out of 140 samples tested (29%) were positive for NmC. The confirmed cases were reported from eight states including Jigawa (231), Zamfara (six), Yobe (five), Benue (one), Gombe (one), Katsina (one), Oyo (one), and Sokoto (one).Fig. 1. Map indicating meningitis cases (n = 1686 suspected cases) between 1 October 2022 and 16 April 2023 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC)Jigawa state consists of 27 LGAs, of which 25 have reported at least one suspected case. There have been 66 deaths in Jigawa state. During the current outbreak, Maigatari LGA and Sule-tankarkar LGA have both crossed the epidemic threshold of 10 suspected cases per 100 000 population and account for 60% of the total reported cases, with 505 and 247 cases respectively.The CFR for this outbreak is 7% and 5% at the national and Jigawa state level, respectively.Fig. 2. Weekly distribution of meningitis cases (n = 1686 suspected cases) between 1 October 2022 and 16 April 2023 Epidemiology of the diseaseMeningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. It is a devastating disease and remains a major public health challenge. The disease can be caused by many different pathogens including bacteria, fungi or viruses, but the highest global burden is seen with bacterial meningitis.Several different bacteria can cause meningitis. Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis are the most frequent ones. N. meningitidis, causing meningococcal meningitis, is the one with the potential to produce large epidemics.Meningococcal meningitis is transmitted from person to person through droplets of respiratory and throat secretions, usually by asymptomatic carriers. Close, prolonged contact with an infected person, or living with a carrier, facilitates the spread of the disease. The average incubation period is four days but can range between two and 10 days.The extended meningitis belt of sub-Saharan Africa, stretching from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east (26 countries) and including the northern part of Nigeria, has the highest disease rates.  Meningitis in these countries follows a seasonal pattern, being most common during the dry season (December through June) with a peak between March and April, when there is persistent low air humidity and high dust loads that are believed to damage the pharyngeal mucosa and ease the colonization of the nasopharyngeal epithelium by the meningococci. Seasonal epidemics vary in size from year to year.Response measures implemented during an outbreak, including improved case finding and management as well as mass vaccination campaigns, contribute to outbreak control.Meningococcal meningitis remains a public health concern, in Nigeria, with outbreaks reported in recent years. With support from WHO, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) is implementing response measures at the national level. These include vaccination, surveillance, active case finding, sample testing, and case management. With support from WHO, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) is implementing response measures at the national level. These include: Nigeria has implemented interventions to combat meningitis, including introducing the meningococcal A (MenA) conjugate vaccine against NmA from 2011-2022. Through preventive campaigns, Nigeria has  vaccinated over 100 million people aged 1 to 29 years, and the vaccine has been included in the country’s routine immunization schedule since 2019. Among MenA vaccinated populations in countries of the meningitis belt, the incidence of serogroup A meningitis has declined by more than 99%, and no serogroup A case has been confirmed since 2017. However, there are still annual reports of meningitis cases in the country that are associated mostly with meningococcus serogroup C (NmC).Insecurity, particularly in Northeast Nigeria, affects vaccination coverage, especially in areas controlled by non-state armed groups. At the national level, immunization coverage remains suboptimal at 50% as of 2021.Licensed vaccines against meningococcal, pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae diseases have been available for many years. These bacteria have several different strains (known as serotypes or serogroups), and vaccines are designed to protect against the most harmful strains. Over time, there have been major improvements in strain coverage and vaccine availability, but no universal vaccine against these infections exists.Additionally, in November 2022, an outbreak of meningitis was confirmed in the Zinder region of Niger. This region borders Jigawa, which is the worst-affected state in Nigeria. The risk of cross-border transmission is high due to the population movement across the border.Based on the above information, the overall risk of meningitis in Nigeria is assessed as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Preventing meningitis through vaccination is the most effective way to reduce the burden and impact of the disease by delivering long-lasting protection. The anticipated rollout of multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines is a public health priority to eliminate bacterial meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt.Early diagnosis and treatment are critical in managing all types of meningococcal disease. Appropriate case management, active community-based case-finding, and reactive mass vaccination of affected populations are necessary in response to epidemics. Currently, there is an ongoing reactive vaccination campaign. To guide further response activities, it is crucial to monitor the spread of the disease to new areas, including considering further vaccine requests if appropriate. Timeliness of the reactive campaign is essential, with the goal being to initiate it within four weeks of crossing the epidemic threshold.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Nigeria based on the currently available information. Citable reference: World Health Organization (27 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Meningitis – Nigeria. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON454Situation at a glanceThis Disease Outbreak News is an update on the report published on 6 April 2023 concerning human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5N1) in Chile. Since then, WHO received information on the results of genomic sequencing and the ongoing public health response.On 5 April, the results of genomic sequencing were completed by the Institute of Public Health of Chile (ISP per its acronym in Spanish), which is the National Influenza Centre (NIC) in Chile, which identified avian influenza virus A(H5N1) phylogenetic clade 2.3.4.4b. The genomic sequencing had 99.9% identity with H5 hemagglutinin sequences from Chilean birds, and complete neuraminidase (NA) had 100% identity with N1 sequences from Chilean birds. A total of 12 contacts (close contacts and healthcare workers) were identified. All tested negative for influenza and have completed the monitoring period. No further cases in Chile have been identified so far.Avian influenza infection in a human can cause severe disease and is notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005) [1]. Description of the caseAs reported previously, on 29 March 2023, the Ministry of Health of Chile notified WHO of the detection of human infection with avian influenza A(H5) virus.On 7 April 2023, the Chile International Health Regulations National Focal Point reported the results of genomic sequencing completed on 5 April 2023 by the NIC, which identified avian influenza A(H5N1) phylogenetic clade 2.3.4.4b.The patient is a 53-year-old male from the Region of Antofagasta in the north of Chile. He had no history of comorbidities or recent travel.On 13 March 2023, the patient developed symptoms including cough, sore throat, and hoarseness. On 21 March, due to worsening symptoms, he sought care at a local hospital. On 22 March 2023, the patient developed dyspnea and was admitted to a Regional Hospital at Antofagasta (SARI Sentinel Site). A nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected as part of routine severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance and tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On 23 March, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and treatment with antivirals (oseltamivir) and antibiotics was initiated. The patient remains in respiratory isolation under multidisciplinary management, with mechanical ventilation due to pneumonia. Standard infection control precautions were kept since the detection of the case.On 27 March, a bronchoalveolar sample was collected and tested positive for an unsubtypeable influenza A virus by PCR. The sample was sent to the ISP and tested positive for avian influenza A(H5) on 29 March. On 31 March, the NIC forwarded the patient's samples to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization. On 5 April, the results of genomic sequencing were completed by the NIC in Chile, which identified avian influenza virus A(H5N1) phylogenetic clade 2.3.4.4b. The genomic sequencing had 99.9% identity with H5 hemagglutinin sequences from Chilean birds, and complete neuraminidase (NA) had 100% identity with N1 sequences from Chilean birds. Three close contacts of the case were identified, all asymptomatic, tested negative for influenza and have concluded the monitoring period. Additionally, a total of nine contacts among healthcare workers were identified, all tested negative for influenza and concluded the monitoring period on 4 April. However, on 5 April one of them developed respiratory symptoms, therefore a nasopharyngeal swab was taken, which tested negative for influenza; the monitoring period for this contact was extended for seven additional days, ending on 11 April.Avian influenza A (H5N1) was first detected in the Region of the Americas in birds in December 2014. Between December 2022 and February 2023, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has been detected in wild aquatic birds (pelicans and penguins) and sea mammals (sea lions) in the Antofagasta Region where the case resides. According to preliminary findings of the epidemiological investigation of this human case, the most plausible route of transmission was through environmental exposure, given the large number of dead sea mammals and wild birds found in the area close to the patient´s residence.Epidemiology of diseaseZoonotic influenza infections in humans may range from asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory infection (fever and cough) to rapid progression to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock, and death, depending on factors related to the virus and the host. Rarely, gastrointestinal, or neurological symptoms have been reported. Human cases of avian influenza are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.In the Region of the Americas during 2022 and 2023, an increasing number of outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5) have been reported in backyard poultry, farm poultry, wild birds, and wild mammals. Since the first confirmation of avian influenza A(H5N1) in the region in 2014, three human infections caused by avian influenza A(H5) have been reported: the first in the United States of America, reported in April 2022; the second in Ecuador, reported in January 2023; and this case. Globally, since 2003, 873 human infections with A(H5N1) viruses, including 458 deaths (CFR 52%), have been reported to WHO.WHO’s risk assessment remains unchanged since the last update.According to the preliminary findings of the local epidemiological investigation, the most plausible hypothesis about transmission is that it occurred through environmental exposure to areas where either sick or dead birds or sea mammals were found close to the residence of the case. According to the information received thus far, the virus has not been detected in other individuals.Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, wild birds or mammals, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected animals or contaminated environments.Public health measures have been implemented by both the human and animal health agencies, including monitoring healthcare workers and other contacts of the laboratory-confirmed case. Currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5) viruses, including H5N1, have not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low.Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.The preliminary risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, and the large outbreaks among animal populations, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and of timely virus sharing for risk assessment. The diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections is alarming and necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection, and pandemic preparedness planning. Vaccination of poultry workers with seasonal influenza vaccine has been advised to prevent a viral mutation that could facilitate human-to-human transmission.WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry.  In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection with a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including avian influenza and variant viruses, contact tracing should be initiated and a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals and of travel should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual clusters of respiratory disease that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus, and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and then sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.There are no approved vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5) in humans. Candidate vaccine viruses to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes. Given the observed extent and frequency of avian influenza cases in wild birds and some wild mammals, the public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes and should report the occurrence to the authorities.Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces or other body fluids. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and food hygiene practices.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses found in humans and animals, and serological investigations, are critical to assess risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), and States Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.[1] https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/case-definitions-for-the-four-diseases-requiring-notification-to-who-in-all-circumstances-under-the-ihr-(2005)Citable reference: World Health Organization (21 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Avian Influenza A (H5N1) - Chile. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON461 Outbreak at a glanceOn 17 March 2023, the Burundi Ministry of Health declared a national public health emergency after reporting the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 from one case of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and five environmental samples. Local public health authorities are conducting a field investigation and an active search for additional AFP cases; a reactive immunization campaign is also planned.Description of the outbreakOn 17 March 2023, the Burundi Ministry of Health declared a national public health emergency following the confirmation of a case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country. The virus was isolated from a four-year-old, zero-dose male child with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from Bujumbura Rural province and from five cVDPV2-positive environmental samples from Bujumbura Mairie province, collected in November and December 2022. The case had the onset of paralysis on 24 November 2022. A stool specimen was collected on 27 November 2022 and was confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 13 March 2023. Sequencing results showed that the isolate has undergone eight to ten nucleotide changes.  All the isolated viruses above are linked to a new emergence of cVDPV2, in Sud-Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) [1].According to the WHO UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, the coverage for both the oral poliovirus vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV1) was 94% in 2021 in Burundi. However, the coverage of OPV3 and IPV1 was 63.4% and 56.6% respectively in the Health Centre of Gatumba where the index case is reported, according to the area coverage survey conducted during the case investigation. These are the first instances of cVDPV2 linked with novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2) since the roll-out of the vaccine began in March 2021. Nevertheless, all available clinical and field evidence continues to demonstrate that nOPV2 is safe and effective and has a significantly lower risk of reverting to a form that causes paralysis in low immunity settings when compared to monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2). To date, close to 600 million doses of nOPV2 have been administered across 28 countries globally, and the majority of countries have seen no further transmission of cVDPV2 after two immunization rounds [1]. Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). An initial risk assessment (multi-country and regional), and field investigation both for the AFP case and the positive environmental samples have been completed by local and national public health authorities with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), and a multi-country response plan has been developed. Burundi and DRC have scheduled initial vaccination campaigns to be conducted in May, and based on the ongoing risk assessment, supplementary immunization activities/vaccination campaigns will be conducted with the first round scheduled for 4-7 May and expected to be followed by two subsequent rounds in June and July 2023 targeting children under 7 years of age in Burundi. The vaccination campaign will be conducted in a synchronized way with bordering/neighbouring countries.Additionally, surveillance for both AFP and environmental is being enhanced in the areas of detection, and the operationalization of further environmental surveillance sites is being evaluated, including bordering locations. Samples from Burundi, DRC, and neighbouring countries are also being prioritized for testing by the Global Polio Laboratory Network.The primary risk associated with any new cVDPV2 is gaps in routine immunization. The risk of further spread of such strains, or the emergence of new strains, is magnified by decreased immunization rates related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This event further highlights the risk of the international spread of cVDPV2 to neighbouring countries. There is no evidence that this virus poses a greater risk of spread, including international spread, than other VDPV2s that are derived from Sabin vaccines. It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than four weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within four weeks to 12 months of travel. As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency; ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors; and restrict, at the point of departure, the travel of individuals who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis. WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Burundi based on the current information available for this event.[1] GPEI Statement on cVDPV2 detections in Burundi and Democratic Republic of the Congo: https://polioeradication.org/news-post/gpei-statement-on-cvdpv2-detections-in-burundi-and-democratic-republic-of-the-congo/Citable reference: World Health Organization (20 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) – Burundi. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON457Outbreak at a glanceOn 17 March 2023, the Indonesia Ministry of Health notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old female with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from Purwakarta district in West Java province. Field investigations were immediately launched by local and national public health authorities, with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI). Two rounds of immunization with novel OPV2 have been planned to cover children below five years of age, regardless of their prior vaccination status. The first round was implemented in April 2023. Description of the outbreakOn 17 March 2023, the Indonesia Ministry of Health notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old female with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from Purwakarta district in West Java province. The case had the onset of paralysis on 16 February 2023. The girl had not received any previous doses of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) or inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV). A stool specimen was collected on 21 February 2023 and was confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 14 March 2023. Genetic sequencing results showed that the isolate has undergone 30 to 31 nucleotide changes from vaccine strains. The results of whole genome sequencing are pending. The patient and her parents had no travel history within the month before the onset of AFP; however, during this period, the household had received visitors including relatives from another village. A total of four confirmed cases of VDPV2 have been reported in Indonesia since November 2022. This includes three cases of circulating VDPV2 (cVDPV2) with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in Aceh province and one in West Java province. Additionally, four healthy children in Aceh province were confirmed to have cVDPV2 on 25 November 2022. The poliovirus was identified as being from the same emergence group as the cases reported in Aceh in 2022 and hence classified as cVDPV2 but is divergent from the Aceh viruses, signifying potentially missed transmission. A rapid risk assessment was conducted for the outbreak in Aceh in November 2022, which assessed the risk at the national level as high, regional level as moderate and global level as low.  The administrative coverage of the bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV4) between 2018 and 2022 in West Java ranged from 88% to 102%, while coverage of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) ranged from 26% to 106%. Vaccination coverage rates for bOPV and IPV were also above 90% in a catch-up campaign in West Java. Coverage with bOPV in the Purwakarta district has been consistently high between 2018 and 2022, ranging from 94% in 2020 to 104% in 2021; however, coverage with IPV decreased to 26% in 2020 before increasing to 80% in 2021, and reaching 100% in 2022.  However, a pocket of unvaccinated children (for either bOPV and IPV) remains in West Java, which is mainly related to a lack of understanding of the importance of immunization by parents, concerns about the safety of the vaccines (including fever following immunization, receiving multiple injections and as a result of other sources of misinformation) and religious beliefs.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). WHO assesses the risk to be high at the national level. Despite Indonesia having a strong capacity to respond to poliovirus outbreaks and West Java having a moderate to strong outbreak response capacity to interrupt transmission, there is a high susceptibility of the population to poliovirus type 2 after switching from trivalent to bivalent OPV; sub-optimal IPV coverage in Aceh, West Java and several other provinces in Indonesia; high population mobility between West Java and other provinces within Indonesia; and reluctance to vaccinate among at-risk populations. The outbreak in Indonesia poses a moderate regional risk and a low risk globally.The detection of cVDPVs highlights the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage everywhere to minimize the risk and consequences of the circulation of any poliovirus, as well as the need to ensure quality surveillance for early detection of any poliovirus.It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should i) declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency; ii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international iii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel iv) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, and v) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data.The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis. WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Indonesia based on the current information available for this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (17 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) – Indonesia. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON458This Disease Outbreak News was amended on 17 April 2023 to include information on partner coordination as part of the ongoing response measures.Situation at a glanceSince the last Disease Outbreak News on this event was published on 22 March 2023 (with data as of 21 March 2023), six additional laboratory-confirmed cases of Marburg virus disease (MVD) have been reported in Equatorial Guinea. This brings the total to 15 laboratory-confirmed and 23 probable cases since the declaration of the outbreak on 13 February 2023. Among the laboratory confirmed there are 11 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio 78.6%; for one confirmed case the outcome is unknown), and all probable cases are dead. The most affected district is Bata in Litoral province, with nine laboratory-confirmed MVD cases reported.WHO is supporting the Ministry of Health by strengthening different response pillars, including but not limited to surveillance, including at points of entry; laboratory; case management; infection prevention and control; risk communication and community engagement.MVD is a disease with high mortality that causes haemorrhagic fever, and is among the diseases that require assessment under the International Health Regulations.On 30 March 2023, WHO assessed the public health risk posed by this outbreak as very high at the national level, high at sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.WHO advises against restrictions to international travel and/or trade in Equatorial Guinea.Description of the situationOn 13 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea declared an outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD) after suspected viral hemorrhagic fever deaths were reported between 7 January and 7 February 2023, and a case tested positive on 12 February for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal.Since the last Disease Outbreak News on this event (22 March 2023) and as of 11 April 2023, six additional laboratory-confirmed cases of MVD were reported in Equatorial Guinea, bringing the total of cases in the outbreak to 15 laboratory-confirmed. Additionally, 23 probable cases have been reported since the start of the outbreak. Eleven deaths were recorded among laboratory-confirmed cases (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) among confirmed cases 78.6%), and all probable cases are dead; for one confirmed case the outcome is unknown. Four laboratory-confirmed cases (26.6%) were reported among healthcare workers, of whom two died. Among the confirmed cases, three have recovered.Figure 1. MVD cases by week of onset* and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, as of 11 April 2023.Among MVD laboratory-confirmed cases with age and sex information (n = 13), the majority occurred among females (9/14; 64.3%), while the most affected age group is 40-49 years (6/14; 42.8%), followed by the age groups 10-19 and 30-39 (three cases each).Five districts (Bata, Ebebiyin, Evinayong, Nsok Nsomo and Nsork) in four provinces (Centro Sur, Kie Ntem, Litoral and Wele-Nzas) have been affected by the outbreak (Figure  2), with Bata district reporting the majority of confirmed cases (n = 9) and deaths (n = 6), and Ebebiyin district, where the outbreak was first detected, reporting the majority of probable cases,(n = 11) (Table 1).In the last 21 days (from 22 March 2023 to 11 April 2023), five confirmed cases were reported from Bata (n = 4) and Nsork (n = 1) districts (Figure 3). Among the four cases reported from Bata district, three cases have an epidemiological link either through a family cluster or through health care setting. The fourth and most recent case was reported on 7 April; an investigation of this case is ongoing to establish transmission chains and ensure appropriate identification of all contacts.Since the last Disease Outbreak News on this event, one new district, Nsork in Wele-Nzas province, has been affected by the outbreak, reporting one confirmed case, linked to a known case from another district that previously reported confirmed cases.Since the start of the outbreak and as of 10 April 2023, a total of 1322 contacts have been listed, with an average follow-up rate around 80-90%.Table 1. Number of MVD cases and deaths, by district and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, as of 11 April 2023.Figure 2. Map of districts reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases as of 11 April, Equatorial Guinea.Figure 3. Map of districts reporting MVD confirmed cases in the last 21 days (from 21 March 2023 to 11 April 2023), Equatorial Guinea.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg virus. The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, although not all cases have haemorrhagic signs,  and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, Remdesivir is being used on compassionate care bases. Supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies. This is the first time that Equatorial Guinea has reported an outbreak of MVD. Another MVD outbreak is currently taking place in Tanzania with a total of eight confirmed cases and five deaths as of 4 April 2023. Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).CoordinationSurveillanceLaboratory Clinical careInfection Prevention and Control (IPC)Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) Border health and points of entry Operational support and logistics (OSL) Readiness and preparedness in neighboring countriesEquatorial Guinea is facing an outbreak of MVD for the first time and the country's capacity to manage the outbreak needs to be strengthened. In addition to the nine confirmed cases reported in the Disease Outbreak News of 22 March, six more individuals have tested positive for MVD, with an additional affected province. While many cases are linked within a social network or by geographic proximity, the presence of cases and/or clusters across multiple districts without clear epidemiologic links may indicate undetected transmission of the virus. The presence of confirmed cases in Bata increases the risk of disease spread, as it is the most populated city and economic hub of Equatorial Guinea, with an international airport and port. Bata has also reported the highest number of confirmed cases and confirmed deaths. The last case was also reported from Bata and investigation is ongoing to establish transmission chains. The country surveillance system remains suboptimal with few alerts reported and investigated. Several epidemiological links and transmission chains have not been detected, thus there might be contacts not identified.Implemented infection prevention and control measures are insufficient as demonstrated by MVD cases reported among healthcare workers. The diagnostic capacity for Marburg virus in the country is limited in terms of the number of samples that can be analyzed per day (a maximum of around 50 a day). The community's perception of risk is estimated to be very low. There are frequent population movements between the different districts of the mainland region, as well as with the island region, despite the quarantine measures implemented in several of the affected areas. Frequent population movements and very porous land borders are also reported in the districts bordering Cameroon and Gabon, with surveillance at land entry points being suboptimal, and countless uncontrolled paths or trails along the border with Cameroon and Gabon. Also, surveillance at the entry points of the international Bata airport or international seaport, is not optimal. Considering the above-described situation, on 30 March 2023, WHO assessed the risk posed by this outbreak as very high at the national level, high at sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.Marburg virus disease outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as prompt isolation and case management; surveillance including active case search, case investigation and contact tracing; an optimal laboratory service; infection prevention and control, including prompt safe and dignified burial; and social mobilization. Community engagement is key to successfully controlling Marburg disease outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for infection with Marburg virus and the protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission. Health and care workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply IPC measures including standard and transmission-based precautions to avoid contact with the patient’s blood and body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects. Health facilities should ensure environmental controls, such as adequate water, sanitation and hygiene, as well as that safe infectious waste management protocols are in place to enable health workers to practice IPC measures. WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex for 12 months from onset of symptoms, or until their semen twice tests negative for the Marburg virus. Contact with body fluids should be avoided and washing with soap and water is recommended. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for the Marburg virus.Based on the available information and current risk assessment, WHO advises to strengthen surveillance at points of entry in the affected areas in Equatorial Guinea for the identification of cases, including through exit screening; to map cross-border population mobility to identify populations in vulnerable situations and target public health interventions; and to provide public health information and advice in all relevant languages at points of entry and in adjacent communities near land borders. In addition, suspect, probable and confirmed cases and their contacts should not undertake travel, including international.WHO advises against any other international travel and/or trade measures in Equatorial Guinea.States Parties adopting international travel- and trade-related measures potentially more restrictive than those advised by WHO, are invited to report them to WHO, pursuant to Article 43 of the International Health Regulations (2005). Citable reference: World Health Organization (15 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease - Equatorial Guinea. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON459On 27 March 2023, the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus. This is the third reported case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus; all three cases have been reported from China.Epidemiological investigation and close contact tracing have been carried out. There have been no other cases found among close contacts of the infected individual.Based on available information, it appears that this virus does not have the ability to spread easily from person to person, and therefore the risk of it spreading among humans at the national, regional, and international levels is considered to be low. However, due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO stresses the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses which may affect human (or animal) health. On 27 March 2023, the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus. The patient was a 56-year-old female from Guangdong province with an onset of illness on 22 February 2023. She was hospitalized for severe pneumonia on 3 March 2023 and subsequently died on 16 March 2023.The case was detected through the severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance system. The patient had multiple underlying conditions. She had a history of exposure to live poultry before the onset of the disease, and a history of wild bird presence around her home. No close contacts of the case developed an infection or symptoms of illness at the time of reporting.Environmental samples were collected from the patient's residence and the wet market where the patient spent time before the onset of illness. The results of testing showed that the samples collected from the wet market were positive for influenza A(H3).Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may be asymptomatic or may cause disease. Depending on factors related to the specific virus and the infected host, disease can range from conjunctivitis or mild flu-like symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease or even death. Gastrointestinal or neurological symptoms have been reported but these are rare.Human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.The Chinese government has taken the following monitoring, prevention, and control measures:Avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses are commonly detected globally in animals. Influenza A(H3N8) viruses are some of the most commonly found subtypes in birds, causing little to no sign of disease in either domestic poultry or wild birds. Cross-species transmission of A(H3N8) avian influenza viruses has been reported for various mammal species, including being endemic in dogs and horses.This is the third reported human infection with A(H3N8) from China. Two previous cases were reported in April and May 2022. One of the previous cases developed a critical illness, while the other had a mild illness. Both cases likely acquired infection from direct or indirect exposure to infected poultry. So far, no additional cases linked with this case, nor the previous cases, have been reported. According to reports from health officials, the preliminary epidemiological investigation into this event suggests that exposure to a live poultry market may have been the cause of infection. However, it is still unclear what the exact source of this infection is and how this virus is related to other avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses that are circulating in animals. To better understand the current risk to public health, more information is needed from both human and animal investigation.The transmission of avian influenza viruses from birds to humans is usually sporadic and happens in a specific context: most human infections with avian influenza viruses that have been reported previously were due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Since avian influenza viruses continue to be detected in poultry populations, further sporadic human cases are expected in the future.The available epidemiological and virological information suggests that avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses do not have the capacity for sustained transmission among humans. Therefore, the current assessment is that the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. However, due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virologic, epidemiologic and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses which may affect human (or animal) health. To minimize the risk of infection, countries should increase public awareness of the importance of avoiding contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms, live poultry, or surfaces that may be contaminated by poultry or bird faeces. It is recommended to maintain good hand hygiene by frequently washing hands or using alcohol-based hand sanitizer and wearing respiratory protection when in a risky environment.Given the observed extent and frequency of avian influenza cases in wild birds and some wild mammals, the public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes and should report the occurrence to the authorities.Travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces or other body fluids. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO advises against the application of travel or trade restrictions based on the information available at this time.Influenza viruses are constantly evolving and large outbreaks occur among animal populations, which is why WHO stresses the importance of global surveillance to detect any changes in virology, epidemiology, and clinical patterns associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses, which may pose a threat to human or animal health. Collaboration between the animal and human health sectors is essential. As the extent of influenza viruses circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiologic and virologic surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should continue systematically. Timely sharing of information is critical for risk assessment.The variety of zoonotic influenza viruses that have led to human infections is worrying and demands increased surveillance in both animal and human populations, as well as a comprehensive examination of each zoonotic infection, and planning for pandemics. To prevent a viral mutation that could make human-to-human transmission easier, poultry workers have been recommended to receive seasonal influenza vaccination.If a human infection with a novel influenza virus that has pandemic potential, such as avian influenza, is confirmed or suspected, even before receiving confirmatory laboratory results,  contact tracing should be immediately initiated. A thorough epidemiological investigation should be conducted, including a history of travel and exposure to animals . The investigation should also involve early identification of unusual clusters of respiratory disease that could indicate person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested, and then sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses found in humans and poultry, and serological investigations, are critical to assess risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.Under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), States Parties are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of human infection caused by a new subtype of influenza virus. Investigation, virus sharing, and genetic and antigenic characterization of every human infection are essential.This event does not change the current recommendations from WHO for public health measures and surveillance of influenza.Citable reference: World Health Organization (11 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Avian Influenza A (H3N8) – China. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON456Situation at a glanceSince mid-December 2022, Togo has been responding to a meningitis outbreak that has so far resulted in a total of 141 cases and 12 deaths (CFR 8.5%), with almost half of the cases affecting children and young adults between 10 and 19 years of age. Overall, 22 samples have been confirmed as Streptococcus pneumoniae.Togo is located in the African meningitis belt, with seasonal outbreaks recurring every year. However, the current outbreak is concerning due to different concomitant factors, including the security crisis in the Sahel which causes population movements, and suboptimal surveillance capacity. This is also the country’s first time dealing with a pneumococcal meningitis outbreak.An incident management system has been established to coordinate the outbreak response activities, and WHO is supporting the shipment of antibiotics (ceftriaxone) to improve case management.WHO assesses the overall risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Description of the situationOn 15 February 2023, the Ministry of Health of Togo officially declared a meningitis outbreak in Oti Sud district, Savanes region, in the northern part of the country. From 19 December 2022 to 2 April 2023, a total of 141 suspected cases of meningitis with 12 deaths (CFR 8.5%) have been reported from Oti Sud district, corresponding to an attack rate of 112 per 100 000 population.Figure 1. Number of reported meningitis cases and deaths, 19 December 2022 (week 51 of 2022) to 2 April 2023 (week 13 of 2023), Oti Sud district, Savanes region, Togo.A total of 118 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were collected from suspected cases, of which 22 were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and culture for Streptococcus pneumoniae at the national reference laboratory (81 samples were negative and the results for 15 samples are pending).The most affected age group is 10–19 years (47%; n = 66), followed by the ≥30-year age group with 20% (n = 28) of cases, and the 20-29 year age group with 15% (n = 22) of cases. There is no difference in the case distribution by gender, with 71 (53%) cases reported among males.Togo introduced the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugated vaccine (PCV13) in 2014, which is currently administered in three doses at the first, second and third months of life. The administrative PCV13 coverage in the Savanes region is 100% for the third dose, but the immunization history is not available for the individual cases, and it is not known if the serotype(s) involved are covered by the vaccine. Additionally, the most affected age groups were born before the PCV13 introduction in 2014 and could have not received the vaccine.Epidemiology of the diseaseMeningitis is a devastating disease with a high case fatality rate and serious long-term complications (sequelae). It remains a major global public-health challenge. Many organisms can cause bacterial meningitis. Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenzae type b constitute the majority of all cases of bacterial meningitis and 90% of bacterial meningitis in children. It is estimated that about one million children die of pneumococcal disease every year.Streptococcus pneumoniae is an encapsulated bacterium, and about 90 distinct pneumococcal serotypes have been identified throughout the world, with a small number of these serotypes being able to cause disease. Pneumococci are transmitted by direct contact with respiratory secretions from patients and healthy carriers. Serious pneumococcal infections include pneumonia, meningitis and febrile bacteraemia; otitis media, sinusitis and bronchitis are more common but less serious manifestations. The incubation period is two to 10 days. Pneumococcal meningitis has a high case fatality rate (36%–66%) in the African meningitis belt, requires longer treatment than meningococcal meningitis, and is more frequently associated with severe sequelae.Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis typically requires lumbar puncture. In the absence of lumbar puncture, diagnosis can only be suspected through clinical examination (but not confirmed, except with a positive blood culture). Culture and PCR are confirmatory tests for bacterial meningitis. Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) can support the diagnosis but are not confirmatory. Identification of serotypes or serogroups and susceptibility to antibiotics are important to define control measures. Molecular typing and whole genome sequencing can identify additional differences between strains and inform public health responses.A range of antibiotics is used to treat meningitis, including penicillin, ampicillin, and ceftriaxone. During epidemics of meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis, ceftriaxone is the drug of choice. Nevertheless, pneumococcal resistance to antimicrobials is a serious and rapidly increasing problem worldwide.Two classes of pneumococcal vaccines are currently available. Conjugate vaccines are effective from six weeks of age at preventing meningitis and other severe pneumococcal infections and are recommended for infants and children up to the age of five years, and in some countries for adults aged over 65 years, as well as individuals from certain risk groups. Two different conjugate vaccines are in use that protects against 10 and 13 serotypes, respectively. New conjugate vaccines designed to protect against more pneumococcal serotypes are either in development or have been approved for use in adults. Conjugate vaccines are also effective in preventing nasopharyngeal carriage. A polysaccharide vaccine against 23 serotypes is available but, as for other polysaccharide vaccines, this type of vaccine is considered less effective than conjugate vaccines. It is used mostly in those aged over 65 years to protect against pneumonia, as well as in individuals from certain risk groups. It is not used in children under two years of age and is less useful in protecting against meningitis.Togo is part of the African meningitis belt and annually records meningitis cases and deaths. Although the country has experience in the management of meningococcal meningitis outbreaks over the past years, the current Streptococcus pneumoniae outbreak is unusual as the country has never managed a pneumococcal meningitis outbreak in the past, and national capacity is limited. To date, no imported cases have been reported in neighbouring countries. However, several factors are likely to increase the risk of spread, including the country's location in the African meningitis belt; the epidemic season, which typically runs from January to June; constraints in the provision of vaccination services, which do not allow for optimal vaccination coverage to protect the population; the fact that the main age groups affected by the outbreak are not protected by the routine vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae introduced in Togo in 2014; the security crisis in the Sahel, affecting the Savanes region, hampering public health interventions and causing population movements; the precarious economic conditions in the country, particularly in the Savanes region; and the suboptimal surveillance capacity for early case detection, diagnosis and treatment in the Oti Sud district. Neighbouring countries are also in the African meningitis belt, and the Oti Sud district borders Ghana and Benin, making it possible for the disease to spread to other countries in the region.Considering the above-described situation, WHO assesses the overall risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Early diagnosis and appropriate case management are essential, given the high case fatality and risk of developing sequelae due to pneumococcal meningitis. Prompt antibiotic treatment should be ensured for a duration of 10-14 days. Active community-based case-finding and community engagement should be implemented to inform the communities of the signs of meningitis and the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. The collection of detailed epidemiological and microbiological data, including serotyping, is essential to inform the pneumococcal meningitis control strategy.Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines are effective in preventing meningitis and other serious pneumococcal infections. To date, the available data do not support recommendations for reactive vaccination campaigns against pneumococcal meningitis outbreaks. Recommendations for the use of pneumococcal vaccine in community outbreak settings were discussed by the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) in October 2020, with one main conclusion being that more research and evidence gathering was needed from countries of the African meningitis belt, in order to develop a strategy for pneumococcal meningitis outbreak prevention and response.WHO, with the support of many partners, has developed a Global Roadmap to defeat meningitis by 2030. Concerted actions to achieve this goal are organized around five interrelated pillars:Based on the information currently available on this outbreak, WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions for Togo.Citable reference: World Health Organization (11 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Pneumococcal meningitis - Togo. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON455Situation at a glanceOn 29 March 2023, the Ministry of Health of Chile notified WHO of a laboratory-confirmed case of human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5) virus in the Region of Antofagasta. This is the first human infection with avian influenza A(H5) virus reported in Chile and the third reported in the Region of the Americas to date. This is a single human infection, and no further case has been identified so far. An outbreak investigation is ongoing including determining the exposure of the case to the virus. In recent months of 2023, unprecedented outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) in animals have been reported from Chile. Avian Influenza A(H5N1) viruses have been detected among backyard poultry, farm poultry, wild birds, and sea mammals.Avian influenza infection in a human can cause severe disease and is notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005)[1]. Description of the caseOn 29 March 2023, the Ministry of Health of Chile notified WHO of the detection of human infection with avian influenza A(H5) virus, confirmed by the Institute of Public Health of Chile (ISP per its acronym in Spanish), which is the National Influenza Centre. The patient is a 53-year-old male from the Region of Antofagasta in the north of Chile. He had no history of comorbidities or recent travel.On 13 March 2023, he developed symptoms including cough, sore throat, and hoarseness. On 21 March, due to worsening symptoms, he sought care at a local hospital. On 22 March 2023, the case developed dyspnea and was admitted to a Regional Hospital at Antofagasta. A nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected as part of routine severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance and tested negative for COVID-19 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On 23 March, he was admitted to the intensive care unit. On 24 March, treatment with antivirals (oseltamivir) and antibiotics was initiated. He remains in respiratory isolation under multidisciplinary management, with mechanical ventilation due to pneumonia.  On 27 March, a bronchoalveolar sample was collected and tested positive for an unsubtypeable influenza A virus by RT-PCR. The sample was sent to the ISP and tested positive for avian influenza A(H5) on 29 March. The neuraminidase type is yet to be confirmed and the clade information for the avian influenza A(H5) virus detected in this human case is not yet known. The NIC has forwarded the patient's samples to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization. Three close contacts of the case were asymptomatic and tested negative for influenza and have concluded the monitoring period. Additionally, a total of nine contacts among health care workers were identified, all concluded the monitoring on 4 April, however on 5 April one of them developed respiratory symptoms, therefore, further testing is ongoing, and the period of monitoring was extended for 7 more days for this contact of the case.Avian influenza A (H5N1) was first detected in the Americas in birds in December 2014. Between December 2022 and February 2023, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) was detected in wild aquatic birds (pelicans and penguins) and sea mammals (sea lions) in the Antofagasta Region where the case resides. According to preliminary findings of the epidemiological investigation of this human case, the most plausible route of transmission was through environmental exposure in areas close to the residence of the case where either sick or dead sea mammals or wild birds were found.Epidemiology of diseaseZoonotic influenza infections in humans may range from asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory infection (fever and cough) to rapid progression to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock, and death, depending on factors related to the virus and the host. Rarely, gastrointestinal, or neurological symptoms have been reported. Human cases of avian influenza are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.In the Region of the Americas during 2022 and 2023, an increasing number of outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5) have been reported in backyard poultry, farm poultry, wild birds, and wild mammals. Since the first confirmation of avian influenza A(H5N1) in the region in 2014, three human infections caused by avian influenza A(H5) have been reported: the first in the United States of America, reported in April 2022; the second in Ecuador, reported in January 2023; and this case. Globally, since 2003, 873 human infections, including 458 deaths (CFR 52%), with A(H5N1) viruses have been reported to WHO. Additionally, three human infections with influenza A (H5[2]) viruses, 84 human cases of infection with A(H5N6) viruses, and seven human cases of infection with A(H5N8) viruses have been reported to WHO. According to the preliminary findings of the local epidemiological investigation, the most plausible hypothesis about transmission is that it occurred through environmental exposure to areas where either sick or dead birds or sea mammals were found close to the residence of the case. According to the information received thus far, the virus has not been detected in other individuals.Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, wild birds or mammals, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected animals or contaminated environments.Public health measures have been implemented by both the human and animal health agencies, including monitoring healthcare workers and other contacts of the laboratory-confirmed case. While further characterization of the virus from this human case is pending, currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5) viruses have not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low.Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.The preliminary risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, and the large outbreaks among animal populations, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and of timely virus sharing for risk assessment. The diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections is alarming and necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection, and pandemic preparedness planning. Vaccination of poultry workers with seasonal influenza vaccine has been advised to prevent a viral mutation that could facilitate human-to-human transmission.WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry.  In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) with a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including avian influenza and variant viruses, contact tracing should be initiated and a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals and of travel should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual clusters of respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus, and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and then sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.There are no approved vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5) in humans. Candidate vaccine viruses to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes.Given the observed extent and frequency of avian influenza cases in wild birds and some wild mammals, the public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes and should report the occurrence to the authorities.Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces or other body fluids. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses found in humans and poultry, and serological investigations, are critical to assess risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), and States Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification._____________________________________________[1] https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/case-definitions-for-the-four-diseases-requiring-notification-to-who-in-all-circumstances-under-the-ihr-(2005)[2] Neuraminidase subtype not known. Citable reference: World Health Organization (6 April 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Avian Influenza A (H5) - Chile. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON453Situation at a glanceOn 7 March 2023, the National IHR Focal Point (NFP) for Germany notified WHO of five cases of iatrogenic botulism in individuals who underwent medical procedures with the injection of botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT/A) in health institutions in Türkiye. As of 17 March 2023, a total of 71 cases were reported in four countries in the European Region, mainly linked to two hospitals in different locations in Türkiye.The products used for the treatment were seized and taken for examination and evaluation by the Turkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency. No new symptomatic cases have been reported since 8 March 2023.Outbreaks of botulism are very rare and can be associated with a natural, accidental, or potentially deliberate source of infection.Description of the situationOn 7 March 2023, the National IHR Focal Point (NFP) for Germany notified WHO of five cases of iatrogenic botulism in individuals who underwent medical procedures with the injection of botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT/A) in health institutions in Türkiye.  As of 17 March 2023, a total of 71 clinical botulism cases were reported from Türkiye (53 cases), Germany (16 cases), Austria (one case) and Switzerland (one case) linked to the aforementioned medical interventions performed in Türkiye between 22 February and 1 March 2023.All cases are adults; most cases are middle-aged women. Among the 69 cases for which treatment location information is known, two private hospitals in two locations in Türkiye were identified, with 66 cases linked to one hospital and three cases to another hospital.The clinical presentation of the cases ranged from mild to severe. Clinical signs of BoNT intoxication were observed (including fatigue, headache, blurred and/or double vision, dizziness, ptosis, dysphagia, dyspnea, neck weakness, generalized muscle weakness, and swollen tongue). Several cases were hospitalized. Some cases were treated with botulinum antitoxin. At least five cases were admitted to intensive care units. There are no reported deaths.Investigations carried out by Turkish authorities reported that licensed BoNT products were administered for a different purpose other than for which the products were approved (off-label use). The relevant departments of both hospitals had their activities suspended on 1 March 2023, and investigations have been launched against the parties involved.  The products used for the treatment were seized and taken for examination and evaluation by the Turkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency. No new symptomatic cases have been reported since 8 March 2023, which was the date of symptom onset for the last reported case.The Turkish Ministry of Health is working with the Türkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency and the Turkish National Poison Solidarity Center to investigate this event. The Turkish General Directorate of Public Health, Department of Communicable Diseases and Early Warning. is conducting an epidemiological investigation with provincial health centres and related departments. The relevant units of the Ministry of Health and the Turkish Police Service urgently inspected the two hospitals mentioned above. The investigation is currently ongoing to determine if the cause of the intoxication is due to product quality/safety, medical error, or an overdose.WHO is collaborating with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), and the affected IHR State Parties, regarding investigation, risk assessment, information sharing and response for this event.The Turkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency published an announcement on its website on 10 March 2023. Similarly, the ECDC announced the current situation regarding this event in their publicly-available Communicable Disease Threats Report on 10 March 2023, and a news story was published on the ECDC website on 14 March 2023.Botulinum neurotoxins are dangerous toxins produced by several species of the genus Clostridium (e.g., C. botulinum, C. baratii, C. butyricum, and C. sporogenes) under anaerobic conditions. Botulinum neurotoxins are one of the most lethal substances known and occur in eight serotypes (A to H). Botulinum neurotoxins block nerve functions and can lead to muscular, including respiratory, paralysis. Human botulism is a naturally occurring rare disease and may refer to foodborne botulism, infant botulism, wound botulism, and inhalation botulism.Clostridium botulinum culture is used to produce pharmaceutical botulinum toxin-containing products. These pharmaceutical products employ the purified and heavily diluted botulinum neurotoxin (type A or type B, depending on the indication) injected for clinical use for the treatment of more than 20 neurological and non-neurological disorders, as well as for cosmetic use. Treatment is administered in the medical setting, tailored according to the needs of the patient and desired treatment effect.The symptoms of botulism can be very severe, requiring intensive-care treatment as well as the administration of specific anti-toxins. Even when such treatments are available, severe botulism cases require supportive treatment, including mechanical ventilation. Complete recovery usually takes weeks to months.This current event is possibly linked to a specific procedure and/or a medical product in at least two healthcare settings. Further investigations are ongoing regarding case ascertainment and notification. The investigation remains open for other possible hypotheses of intoxication. The respective departments in the two clinics where the procedures were undertaken have been closed since 1 March, with no further cases reported.There are several clinical indications for the use of botulinum neurotoxin; however, its off-label use in bariatric cases has increased in many countries. Depending on the product used, a warning of toxic effects may be insufficiently worded, and the risks not adequately addressed in the patient consent process. Botulism outbreaks are rare, but outbreaks require rapid recognition to identify the source of the disease, distinguish between types of outbreaks (natural, accidental or potentially deliberate), prevent additional cases, and effectively administer treatment to affected patients.Successful treatment depends significantly on early diagnosis and the rapid administration of the botulinum antitoxins. Iatrogenic botulism should be suspected if a patient has recently received botulinum neurotoxin, and clinicians should remain mindful of the risk of systemic botulism with BoNT therapy. The diagnostic detection of BoNT/A in patients suffering from iatrogenic botulism might be highly challenging due to the extremely low dose of toxin present and the potentially suboptimal timepoint of serum sampling. So far, very few detection methods have been shown to be validated on clinical specimens with a sensitivity better than the classical mouse bioassay, which is still regarded as a reference for BoNT detection in clinical samples. At this time, it cannot be confirmed if the reported cases of botulism intoxication are due to product quality/safety, medical error, or an overdose.Although the source of the outbreak may have been removed, WHO Member States need to remain vigilant. It is therefore critically important for the IHR State Parties to identify any additional possible case, to establish the cause, and to determine if the product used in the procedure could be substandard or falsified. Investigation of these cases will assist in rapid containment at the disease source to prevent additional possible cases.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Türkiye based on the information available for this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 March 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Iatrogenic Botulism– European Region. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON450                                                     Situation at a glanceOn 21 March 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the United Republic of Tanzania declared an outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD) in the country. As of 22 March, a total of eight cases, including five deaths (case fatality ratio [CFR]: 62.5%) have been reported from two villages in Bukoba district, Kagera region, United Republic of Tanzania. Two of these cases were healthcare workers, one of whom has died. This is the first Marburg virus disease outbreak reported in the country.As response measures, Rapid Response Teams have been deployed to investigate and implement interventions in the affected areas, including contact tracing and risk communication activities. WHO assesses the risk of spread as very high at the national level, high at the subregional level, and moderate at the regional level due to cross-border movements between Kagera region and bordering countries including Uganda in the north, Rwanda and Burundi in the west. The risk at the global level is assessed to be low.Description of the situationOn 16 March 2023, the MoH of the United Republic of Tanzania announced that seven cases and five deaths from an unknown disease had been reported in two villages in Bukoba district, Kagera region, northern Tanzania. The cases were later confirmed as Marburg virus infection by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Public Health Laboratory, Tanzania. On 21 March 2023, the MoH officially declared the first MVD outbreak in the country.As of 22 March, eight cases, including five deaths (case fatality ratio [CFR]: 62.5%) have been reported from Kagera region. The remaining three patients are currently undergoing treatment. As of 22 March, no cases have been reported from outside the Bukoba district of Kagera Region.The first identified case reported travel history from Goziba Island in Lake Victoria in Tanzania and developed symptoms after returning to his village in Bukoba. The case died in the community. Four additional cases were identified from the same family as this index case. Further, two cases were reported among healthcare workers who treated them, one of whom died. No information is available on the eighth case; investigations are ongoing. Reported symptoms of the patients were fever, diarrhoea, vomiting, bleeding from various sites, and kidney failure. Samples from both deceased and live cases were taken and confirmed for Marburg virus by the National Public Health Laboratory.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus disease is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case-fatality rates (CFR 24-90%). It is caused by the same family of viruses (Filoviridae) as Ebola virus disease and is clinically similar. The current CFR for this outbreak is relatively high, at 62.5%.Marburg virus infection often results from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies. Once an individual is infected with the virus, it can spread through human-to-human transmission via direct contact with the blood, secretions or other body fluids of infected or deceased people. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg.The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea, and vomiting can begin around the third day. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between eight and nine days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.Clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult in the early phase as symptoms are similar to other febrile illnesses. The differential diagnosis for MVD may include other filovirus diseases, Lassa fever, malaria, typhoid fever, dengue, rickettsial infections, leptospirosis and plague.Laboratory confirmation is primarily made by RT-PCR. Other tests can be used such as antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), antigen-capture detection tests, serum neutralization tests, electron microscopy, and virus isolation by cell culture.Although there are no vaccines or antiviral treatments for MVD, supportive care – such as rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.This is the first time that Tanzania has reported an outbreak of MVD. Even though there is an ongoing outbreak of MVD in Equatorial Guinea (for more details, please see the Disease outbreak news published on 22 March), so far there is no evidence of an epidemiological link between the two outbreaks. Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975). The United Republic of Tanzania has reported its first outbreak of MVD, which is a highly virulent disease, with a fatality ratio of up to 90%. The affected region, Kagera, borders three countries (Uganda to the north, and Rwanda and Burundi to the west) and Lake Victoria, and cross-border population movements may increase the risk of disease spread. In addition, Marburg virus has been isolated from fruit bats (Roussettus aegyptiacus) in Tanzania and countries neighboring the affected Kagera region, therefore, the same bat species may carry the virus in this region.Due to the high CFR and existing risk of spread of the outbreak to other areas of the country, inadequate human, financial and material resources to implement response interventions, and the likelihood of existing capacities being overwhelmed if the cases increase, the risk at the national level is assessed as very high.Following the recent Ebola virus outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 23 April - 3 July 2022 and from 21 August - 27 September 2022, and Sudan ebolavirus outbreak in Uganda from 20 September 2022 to 11 January 2023, neighbouring countries in the subregion, including the United Republic of Tanzania, have been building preparedness capacities against filovirus diseases. In the West African region, an outbreak of MVD was declared on 13 February 2023 in Equatorial Guinea and is ongoing.Based on the available information, the risk is considered as high at the subregional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.Human-to-human transmission of Marburg virus is primarily associated with direct contact with the blood and/or other bodily fluids of infected people. Marburg virus transmission associated with health care services has been reported in previous outbreaks when appropriate infection control measures were not or were inadequately implemented.Healthcare workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply additional infection prevention and control  measures in addition to standard precautions, to avoid contact with patients' blood and other body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects.Surveillance and detection activities, including contact tracing and active case finding, should be strengthened in all affected health zones. Measures to contain outbreaks of MVD include prompt safe and dignified burial of the deceased, identification of people who may have been in contact with someone infected with Marburg virus and monitoring their condition for 21 days, separation of healthy and sick people to prevent further transmission and care for confirmed patients, and maintenance of good hygiene and a clean environment.Raising awareness of the risk factors for Marburg infection and the protective measures that individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are key measures to reduce human infections and deaths.WHO encourages all countries to ship samples (positive or negative) to a WHO Collaborating Center for confirmation.Based on the current risk assessment, WHO advises against any travel and trade restrictions with the United Republic of Tanzania.Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 March 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease – United Republic of Tanzania. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON451 Situation at a glanceThe increase in the incidence and geographical distribution of arboviral diseases, including chikungunya and dengue, is a major public health problem in the Region of the Americas (1). Dengue accounts for the largest number of cases in the Region, with epidemics occurring every three to five years. Although dengue and chikungunya are endemic in most countries of Central America, South America, and the Caribbean, in the current summer season, increased transmission and expansion of chikungunya cases have been observed beyond historical areas of transmission. Furthermore, 2023 is showing intense dengue transmission. In addition, higher transmission rates are expected in the coming months in the southern hemisphere, due to weather conditions favourable for the proliferation of mosquitoes.There have been 2.8 million dengue cases reported in the Americas in 2022, which represents over a two-fold increase when compared to the 1.2 million cases reported in 2021. The same increasing trend has been observed for chikungunya, with a high incidence of meningoencephalitis possibly associated to chikungunya reported by Paraguay, which is of further concern.At the regional level, WHO is assessing the risk as high due to the widespread presence of vector mosquitoes, the continued risk of severe disease and even death, and the expansion outside of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of clinical manifestations of the disease, including severe clinical manifestations; and where populations may be immunologically naïve (2).Regional overview In 2022, a total of 3 123 752 cases (suspected and confirmed) of arboviral disease were reported in the Region of the Americas. Of these, 2 809 818 (90%) were dengue cases and 273 685 (9%) were chikungunya cases. This represents a proportional increase of approximately 119% compared to 2021. In 2022, both dengue and chikungunya peaked at epidemiological week (EW) 18 (week commencing 1 May 2022) (3).DengueRegional overviewIn 2022, a total of 2 809 818 cases of dengue, including 1290 deaths, representing a two-fold increase in cases and almost three-fold increase in deaths compared with the cases reported in 2021 (1 269 004 cases, including 437 deaths). During the same period, the highest cumulative incidence of dengue cases was reported in the following countries: Nicaragua with 1455.4 cases per 100 000 population, followed by Brazil with 1104.5 cases per 100 000 population, and Belize with 788.9 cases per 100 000 population (3).Between 1 January 2023 and 4 March 2023, a total of 342 243 dengue cases including 86 deaths were reported in the Region of the Americas. During the same period, the highest cumulative incidence of dengue cases was reported in Bolivia, with 264.4 cases per 100 000 population, followed by Nicaragua with 196.8 cases per 100 000 population, and Belize with 145.6 cases per 100 000 population (3).Figure 1. Distribution of suspected dengue cases, by epidemiological Week, Region of the Americas,1 January 2020 to 4 March 2023.Country overview  Bolivia: Between 1 January and 11 February 2023, a total of 31 283 cases including 50 deaths were reported from Bolivia. Of the reported cases, 47% (n = 14 842) were laboratory-confirmed cases, and 110 cases were classified as severe dengue cases. The confirmed cases were reported from seven of the nine departments. Of these seven affected departments, three accounted for 90% of the reported cases: including Santa Cruz (72%; 10 759 cases, 36 deaths), Beni (9.6%; 1387 cases, 11 deaths), and Tarija (9.3%; 1431 cases, three deaths) (4). The cumulative incidence was 264.4 cases per 100 000 population for dengue. As of EW 6, the case fatality rate at the national level is 0.083%. During the same period, dengue virus type 2 (DENV 2) was reported as the predominant serotype circulating in the country (4). The highest number of cases was reported in 2020, with 111 347 cases. Of these, 33% (n=37 293) were reported between EW 1 through EW 6. In 2023, a total of 31 283 cases of dengue have been reported (4).  Paraguay: Between 1 January and 4 March 2023, a total of 686 cases have been reported. The country has not reported any severe dengue cases or deaths during this period. Confirmed cases have been reported from all the departments, of which three accounted for 50% of the reported cases: Central (22%; n=149), Amambay (15%; n=101), and Asunción (14%; n = 93). As of EW 8 of 2023, DENV 1 and DENV 2 were reported as circulating in the country, with DENV 1 predominant (5). The first large dengue outbreak was reported in the country in 2020, with 223 782 cases. Of these, 65% (n= 146 375) of the cases were reported between EW 1 and EW 7 (5).  Peru: Between 1 January and 4 March 2023, a total of 20 017 dengue cases have been reported, including 25 deaths. Of these cases, 80 were classified as severe dengue cases. Confirmed cases were reported from 19 of the 25 regions and from 80 provinces. As of EW 10 of 2023, DENV 1, DENV 2, and DENV 3 serotypes have been detected as circulating, with DENV 1 predominant. The highest cumulative incidence of dengue in Peru was recorded in 2017, with 68 290 cases reported (6, 7).ChikungunyaRegional overviewBetween 1 January and 4 March 2023, a total of 113 447 cases of chikungunya were reported in the Region of the Americas, including 51 deaths, representing a four-fold increase in cases and deaths compared with the same period in 2022 (21 887 cases, including eight deaths). These counts also exceeded the average number of cases for the previous five years for EW1 through EW10. Of the cases reported in the Region, the highest cumulative incidence of chikungunya cases was reported in Paraguay with 1103.4 cases per 100 000 population, followed by Brazil with 14.2 cases per 100 000 population, and Belize with 10.4 cases per 100 000 population. Of the total deaths reported in 2023, all were reported from Paraguay (3).In 2022, the number of cases exceeded the average for the previous four years (2018-2021), with a total of 273 685 cases including 87 deaths, representing a two-fold increase in cases and seven-fold increase in deaths compared with the cases reported in 2021 (137 025 cases, including 12 deaths). Of the total deaths reported in 2022, all were reported from Brazil (3).Figure 2. Chikungunya cases by epidemiological week (EW) of report. Region of the Americas, 1 January 2020- 4 March 2023 (until EW 9 of 2023).Country overviewArgentina: Between 1 January 2023 and 12 March 2023, a total of 341 laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported, with no deaths. Of the cases, 60% were imported (acquired the infection during their stay or trip outside the country) (8). Five provinces are currently reporting local transmission of chikungunya: Buenos Aires Province, Buenos Aires City, Córdoba, Corrientes, and Formosa. These provinces have not reported autochthonous cases of chikungunya previously (8). During the same period in 2022, no autochthonous cases of chikungunya were reported (8).Bolivia: Between 1 January and 11 March 2023, a total of 593 cases of chikungunya were reported, representing an 11-fold increase in cases compared with the same period in 2022. Over this period, no deaths have been reported and the national cumulative incidence was five cases per 100 000 population (4).Brazil: Between 1 January and 11 March 2023, a total of 50 103 cases of chikungunya were reported, representing an 83% relative increase compared with the same period in 2022. Six deaths were confirmed in Espírito Santo and Minas Gerais, and 23 deaths remain under investigation. Cases were reported from all 27 Federal Units (9). As of 11 March 2023, the national cumulative incidence was 23.5 cases per 100 000 population. The highest cumulative incidence was reported in the Southern region of the country, with 35 484 cases (39.5 cases per 100 000 population). (9)Paraguay:  Between 2 October 2022 and 4 March 2023, a total of 40 984 cases were reported, including 3510 hospitalized cases and 46 deaths. Of these, 0.3% (n = 162) occurred in neonates, including eight deaths. Additionally, between EW 1 and 9 of 2023, a total of 294 suspected cases of acute meningoencephalitis were reported, 42.5% (n = 125) of which were attributed to chikungunya, and 42% (n=53) of which were among neonates (5). Confirmed and probable cases were reported  in all the departments of the country. The highest number of cases was reported in two departments: Central (24 556 cases, including 32 deaths) and Asunción (9981 cases, including 11 deaths) (5).Peru:  Between 1 January 2023 and 4 March 2023, 97 cases of chikungunya were reported, representing an increase of more than three-fold compared with the same period in 2022. Confirmed cases were reported in four departments; the highest proportion of cases was reported in Piura (69%; n = 67 cases), followed by San Martin (29%: n = 28 cases) (6,7).Epidemiology of diseaseArboviral diseases, such as dengue and chikungunya, are caused by viral infections transmitted to humans through bites of infected mosquitoes. These diseases are global public health threats in the tropical and sub-tropical areas where approximately 3.9 billion people live. (10)DengueDengue is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.Dengue is caused by the dengue virus (DENV), an RNA virus of the family Flaviviridae. There are four distinct but closely related serotypes of the virus (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue, which can include shock or respiratory distress due to plasma leakage, severe bleeding, organ impairment, and death.There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management, are key elements of care to prevent death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.The Region of the Americas has been collecting epidemiological data on dengue since 1980.  Since that time, the virus has spread throughout most of the Region. The highest number of dengue cases were reported in 2019, with more than 3.1 million cases, including 28 203 severe cases and 1773 deaths.ChikungunyaChikungunya is a mosquito-borne viral disease that causes fever and severe joint pain. The disease was first recognized in 1952 during an outbreak in southern Tanzania.Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is most commonly transmitted by female mosquitoes of the species Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, which can also transmit other mosquito-borne viruses, including dengue and Zika. They bite throughout daylight hours, although there may be peaks of activity in the early morning and late afternoon. According to the duration of the clinical manifestations, chikungunya may be acute, sub-acute and chronic. Severe symptoms progressing to death are rare; however, patients at extremes of the age spectrum are at higher risk for severe disease. The disease is clinically characterized by the sudden onset of fever, frequently accompanied by severe and debilitating arthralgia or arthritis, that varies in duration; neurological complications, such as Guillain-Barré syndrome and meningoencephalitis, have been reported. Most patients recover fully from the infection, and the infection can provide lifelong immunity.Neonatal chikungunya has also been described. Most CHIKV infections during pregnancy will not result in the virus being transmitted to the fetus. The highest transmission risk appears to be when women are infected during the intrapartum period, where the vertical transmission rate is as high as 49% (11).Infants are typically asymptomatic at birth and then develop fever, irritability, rash, and peripheral edema. Those infected during the intrapartum period may also develop neurologic disease (e.g., meningoencephalitis, white matter lesions, cerebral oedema, and intracranial hemorrhage), hemorrhagic symptoms, and myocardial disease. Laboratory abnormalities included raised liver function tests, reduced platelet and lymphocyte counts, and decreased prothrombin levels. Neonates who suffer from neurologic disease often develop long-term disabilities. There is no evidence that the virus is transmitted through breast milk.Autochthonous transmission of chikungunya virus was first confirmed in the Region of the Americas in December 2013, followed by epidemic propagation in 2014. Since then, the virus has spread throughout the region.WHO has been supporting Member States in the Region of the Americas in preparedness and response to outbreaks, including organization of health services. The support provided includes:Surveillance:Laboratory:Clinical Management:Advocacy and planning:Risk Communication and community engagement:Dengue and chikungunya can have serious public health impacts. The viruses that cause these infections have been circulating in the Region of the Americas for decades due to the widespread spread of the Aedes spp. mosquitoes (mainly, Aedes aegypti). These arboviruses can be carried by infected travelers (imported cases) and may establish new areas of local transmission in the presence of vectors and a susceptible population. As they are arboviruses, all populations in areas where the mosquito vectors are present are at risk, however, the impact is greatest among the most vulnerable people, for which the arboviral disease programs do not have enough resources to respond to outbreaks.Although dengue and chikungunya are endemic in most tropical and subtropical countries of the Americas and the Caribbean, increased transmission and expansion of chikungunya cases has been observed beyond historical areas of transmission. Furthermore, 2023 is showing intense dengue transmission.The impact of the increased transmission in the Region will depend on several factors, including country capacities for a coordinated public health response and for clinical management; the early start of the arbovirus season in the southern cone; high mosquito densities due to interrupted vector control activities during the COVID-19 pandemic; and the large population susceptible to arbovirus infections, particularly in areas where these viruses are newly circulating. Competing disease priorities and risks may adversely affect disease control and proper clinical management, because of (i) misdiagnosis, given that chikungunya and dengue symptoms may be non-specific and resemble other infections, including Zika and measles, potentially leading to inadequate case management; (ii) overwhelmed healthcare facilities in some areas dealing with a high caseload and other concurrent outbreaks; and (iii) the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the decrease of resources available to arboviral disease programs and the need for capacity building and training of vector-control and healthcare workers, as well as maintenance and procurement of equipment and insecticides to perform vector control activities.The apparent higher proportion of acute meningoencephalitis attributed to chikungunya in Paraguay is of concern. It is not yet known what is causing a higher rate of neurologic disease, which is considered an atypical clinical presentation. Sequencing has identified the East-Central-South-African (ECSA) lineage, which is expanding in geographic range within the region, having first been identified in Brazil in 2014. Introduction of chikungunya virus into new areas with immunologically naïve populations would promote further spread.Aedes spp. mosquitoes are widely distributed in the Region of the Americas, therefore cross-border transmission of dengue and chikungunya is likely. Countries bordering areas with very high transmission of these diseases may be at higher risk,  e.g., those adjacent to Bolivia (dengue) and Paraguay (chikungunya). Additionally, the Southern Hemisphere summer, with high temperatures and high levels of humidity, affects vector dynamics and may increase the likelihood of arboviruses transmission.Thus, the risk at the regional level is assessed as high, due to the widespread presence of the mosquito vector species (especially Aedes aegypti), the continued risk of severe disease and even death, and the expansion outside of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of warning signs and may be immunologically naïve. Moreover, one country in the Region (Paraguay) is experiencing an unprecedented increase of chikungunya cases, and another country in the Region (Bolivia) is experiencing high incidence of dengue cases.Other challenges reported by Member States in the Region include stockouts of several essential supplies for prevention and control, lack of reagents and consumables for laboratory diagnosis, and the need for re-training of field teams and health workers. In addition, higher transmission rates are expected in the coming months, due to weather conditions favourable for vector breeding in the first semester of the year in the southern hemisphere.Prevention efforts should be highly focused on the surveillance and control of Aedes spp. mosquitoes (the most competent vector in the region). Targeted integrated vector surveillance and control measures are helpful to reduce transmission rates. Early detection of severe disease progression and access to proper medical attention is the key to lowering severity and mortality. Personal protective measures to prevent mosquito bites (e.g., through application of mosquito repellents, sleeping under insecticide-treated bed nets during biting hours, and wearing long sleeves and pants) should be maintained by the communities at workplaces, schools and at homes. The highest risk for transmission of DENV and CHIKV is during the day and early evening.No specific antiviral treatment exists for chikungunya and dengue. Clinical management is based on supportive care, including fluids and antipyretics. As symptoms of these arboviruses may overlap, clinical-epidemiological diagnosis may be challenging, and there is serologic cross-reactivity between dengue and Zika viruses, hindering accurate diagnosis, which can lead to inadequate case management and compromise efficient epidemiological surveillance. Molecular diagnosis with RT-PCR is thus recommended.It is very important that the Member States in the Americas be extremely vigilant and prepared to intensify actions to prevent, early detect, diagnose, and control arboviruses, including training and alerting healthcare workers on the detection of cases and potential complications of these diseases, identification of risk groups for severe disease, appropriate clinical management of cases to prevent deaths, and active cross-border coordination and information sharing because of the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries. Given the incidence of arboviral diseases over the last three years, an increase in arbovirus cases is expected in the first half of 2023 in the southern hemisphere, and may be followed by a high transmission season in the countries located in northern South America, Central America and the Caribbean, given the susceptible populations and increasing temperatures.Based on the currently available information, WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for countries in the Americas experiencing the current arboviral epidemics.Citable reference: World Health Organization (23 March 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Geographical expansion of cases of dengue and chikungunya beyond the historical areas of transmission in the Region of the Americas. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON448Situation at a glanceSince the first Disease Outbreak News on this event was published on 25 February 2023,  eight additional laboratory-confirmed cases of Marburg virus disease (MVD) have been reported in Equatorial Guinea. This brings the total to nine laboratory-confirmed cases and 20 probable cases since the declaration of the outbreak in February 2023. There are seven deaths among the laboratory confirmed, and all probable cases are dead. Of the eight new confirmed cases, two were reported from the province of Kié-Ntem, four from the Litoral,  and two from Centre- Sur provinces. The areas reporting cases are about 150 kilometers apart, suggesting wider transmission of the virus.WHO has deployed experts to support national response efforts and strengthen community engagement in the response.MVD is a highly virulent disease that causes haemorrhagic fever, and is among the viral haemorrhagic fevers that require assessment under the International Health Regulations.WHO assesses the risk posed by the outbreak as very high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Description of the situationOn 7 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea reported at least eight suspected MVD deaths that occurred between 7 January and 7 February 2023, in two villages located in the district of Nsok Nsomo, in the eastern province of Kié-Ntem, Río Muni Region.On 12 February 2023, eight blood samples were collected from contacts and sent to the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal, where one of these samples was confirmed positive for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This case presented with fever, vomiting, blood-stained diarrhoea, convulsions, and died on 10 February 2023 in a hospital. The case also had epidemiological links to four deceased suspected cases from one of the villages in Nsok-Nsomo district.On 13 March 2023, samples from two additional individuals from Kié-Ntem province tested positive for MVD by RT-PCR performed at a mobile laboratory at the Regional Hospital of Ebibeyin. Another sample, obtained from a resident of Litoral province in the western part of the country, epidemiologically linked to a confirmed case in Kié-Ntem, tested positive for MVD on 15 March 2023 following RT-PCR performed by the same laboratory. The two provinces (Kié-Ntem and Litoral) are located in different parts of the country, about 150 kilometers apart. On 18 and 20 March three additional laboratory confirmed positive cases were reported from Litoral province. On 20 March two more laboratory confirmed cases were reported from Centre Sur province. The wide geographic distribution of cases and uncertain epidemiological links in Centre Sur province suggests the potential for undetected community spread of the virus.Overall, since the beginning of the outbreak and as of 21 March, a cumulative number of nine confirmed and 20 probable cases have been recorded in Equatorial Guinea.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus and the closely related Ravn virus are the causative agents of Marburg virus disease, which has a case-fatality ratio of up to 88%. Marburg virus disease was initially detected in 1967 after simultaneous outbreaks in Marburg and Frankfurt in Germany, and in Belgrade, Serbia. Rousettus aegyptiacus fruit bats are considered natural hosts for Marburg virus, from which the virus is then transmitted to people.Marburg spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg.The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea, and vomiting can begin on the third day. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between eight and nine days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral haemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, including Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague.Laboratory confirmation is primarily made by RT-PCR. Other tests can be used such as antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), antigen-capture detection tests, serum neutralization test, electron microscopy, and virus isolation by cell culture.Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.This is the first time that Equatorial Guinea has reported an outbreak of MVD. The most recently reported outbreak of MVD was in Ghana in 2022 (where there were three confirmed cases). Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).Equatorial Guinea is facing an outbreak of MVD for the first time while the country's capacity to manage the outbreak needs to be strengthened.In addition to the one confirmed case reported in the Disease Outbreak News of 25 February, eight more individuals have tested positive for MVD, indicating that exposure to the virus may be more widespread.All three affected provinces have international borders with Cameroon and Gabon. Cross-border population movements are frequent, and the borders are very porous. Although no MVD cases have been reported outside Equatorial Guinea the risk of international spread cannot be ruled out.Considering the above-described situation, and based on newly available information since the last update, the geographical spread of the outbreak in Equatorial Guinea and the uncertain epidemiological links for some of the confirmed cases, the risk assessment is currently being reviewed, however, it is considered very high at the national level, high at sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.Marburg virus disease outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as prompt isolation and case management; surveillance including active case search, case investigation and contact tracing; an optimal laboratory service; infection prevention and control, including prompt safe and dignified burial; and social mobilization – community engagement is key to successfully controlling MVD outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Marburg infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission.Healthcare workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply additional IPC measures beyond standard precautions to avoid contact with patients’ blood and body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects.WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex and hygiene for 12 months from onset of symptoms, or until their semen twice tests negative for the Marburg virus. Contact with body fluids should be avoided and washing with soap and water is recommended. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for the Marburg virus.Based on the available information and current risk assessment, WHO advises against any travel and trade restrictions in Equatorial Guinea. Citable reference: World Health Organization (22 March 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease - Equatorial Guinea. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON449Sporadic cases of measles were reported in South Africa throughout 2022. In epidemiological week 40 in 2022 (ending 8 October 2022) an outbreak was declared in Limpopo province. As of 16 March 2023, confirmed cases have been reported from all provinces; eight out of nine South African provinces have declared measles outbreaks1. No deaths associated with measles have been recorded. Most cases (86%) are reported among those aged under 14 years.Community-based surveillance has been strengthened and the Ministry of Health (MoH) is conducting a mass measles vaccination campaign targeting children aged between 6 months and 15 years in all provinces.WHO assesses the risk posed by the current outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level. Description of the situationSouth Africa is a measles-endemic country, with several measles outbreaks reported in recent years.Sporadic cases were reported in all nine provinces in South Africa in 2022. As of 4 March 2023, measles outbreaks were declared in eight provinces, further to the outbreak which was declared in Limpopo province in October 2022 (Figure 1).Figure 1: Epidemiological curve of laboratory-confirmed measles cases in South Africa from week 40, 2022 to week 10, 2023 Source: NICD South African Measles Outbreak 2023 Update 16 MarchFrom epidemiological week 40, 2022 (ending 8 October 2022) to week 10, 2023 (ending 4 March 2023), the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) tested 4830 serum samples for measles, of which 772 (16%) were confirmed measles cases (Figure 2).Figure 2: Number of serum samples tested by NICD and positivity rate (%) in South Africa, week 40 of 2022 to week 10 of 2023The 772 laboratory-confirmed measles cases were reported from the provinces of: Limpopo (275; 36%), North West (198; 26%), Gauteng (124; 16%), Mpumalanga (106; 14%), Free State (28; 3.5%), KwaZulu-Natal (17; 2%), Western Cape (11; 1.5%), Northern Cape (7; 1%) and Eastern Cape (6; 1%) (Figure 3).Figure 3: Geographical distribution of laboratory-confirmed measles cases in South Africa, week 40 of 2022 (ending 8 October 2022) to week 10 of 2023 (ending 4 March 2023)The age of laboratory-confirmed measles cases ranges from two months to 60 years. The majority of cases (42%) are in the age group 5-9 years, followed by the age groups 1-4 years (25%) and 10-14 years (19%). The attack rates (per 100 000 population) are highest among age groups 1-4 years (4.7 / 100 000) and 5-9 years (6.6 / 100 000).Out of the laboratory-confirmed cases, 80 (10%) were vaccinated with at least one dose of measles-containing vaccine (MCV), 92 (12%) were unvaccinated, and the vaccination status of 570 (79.1%) is unknown.According to the South African National Department of Health (NDOH), national immunization coverage of the measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) and second dose (MCV2) was estimated at 87% and 82% respectively in 2021, while in 2022 the respective coverage was 86% and 86%. However, historical vaccination coverage has been low, which may be contributing to the current resurgence. According to WHO-UNICEF estimates, in 2018, MCV1 coverage averaged 81% and MCV2 75%. In 2017, MCV1 and MCV2 coverage was estimated at 81% and 78%. Measles is caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. Measles is a human disease and is not known to occur in animals. It can lead to major epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially among vulnerable people. Among young and malnourished children, pregnant women and immunocompromised individuals, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, measles can cause serious complications, including ear infection, severe diarrhea, blindness, encephalitis, pneumonia, and death.Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse rapidly when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to two hours. A patient is infectious from four days before the start of the rash to four days after its appearance. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) is given at the age of nine months, while the second dose of the measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.South Africa has had several outbreaks in recent years. Between 2003 and 2005, an outbreak occurred with 1676 cases reported. In 2009-2010, a large outbreak occurred with 18 431 documented cases. In 2017, a small outbreak was declared in Western Cape, Gauteng, and Kwazulu-Natal provinces, with a total of 186 cases. In 2019, a cluster of measles cases was reported in Cape Town affecting four siblings with a travel history to a measles-affected country.The Ministry of Health has implemented the costed national measles response plan with the support of WHO. The NDOH is conducting a mass measles vaccination campaign in all provinces, targeting children aged 6 months - 15 years. WHO staff have been deployed to support all aspects of the response: coordination; information management and surveillance; case management; supplies and logistics; and risk communication and community engagement.Other response activities include:Four of the provinces affected by the current outbreak (Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northwest, and KwaZulu-Natal) border Zimbabwe, Botswana and Mozambique. The cross-border movement of populations across the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region2 and the weak disease surveillance health systems in many SADC countries pose a threat for further international spread.There is an ongoing measles outbreak in neighboring Zimbabwe. Response capacities in the region are also constrained due to the concurrent readiness and response efforts to COVID-19, cholera, mpox, wild poliovirus, floods and cyclones.Based on the currently available information, the overall risk of measles in South Africa is assessed as high for the following reasons:Although measles is highly contagious, an effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. MCV1 is given at the age of 9 months in countries with both ongoing transmission and a high risk of measles mortality among infants. These countries should administer the routine MCV2 at the age of 15-18 months. However, in South Africa, MCV1 is given at 6 months and MCV2 is given at 12 months3. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation. Reaching all children with two doses of the measles vaccine is recommended to ensure immunity and prevent outbreaks, as about 15% of vaccinated children fail to develop immunity from the first dose.Routine vaccination of children against measles, combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with high morbidity and mortality rates, are key public health strategies to reduce burden and transmission.There is no specific treatment for measles. Case management of measles focuses on supportive care as well as the prevention and treatment of measles complications and secondary infections. Since measles is highly contagious, patient isolation is an important intervention to prevent the further spread of the virus.Oral rehydration salts should be used as needed to prevent dehydration. All children diagnosed with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A oral supplements, given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A; 50 000 international units (IU) should be given to infants aged < 6 months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6-11 months and 200 000 IU to children aged 12 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children, and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk of malnutrition due to diarrhoea, vomiting and poor appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should be encouraged where appropriate.In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individuals, the measles vaccine may be administered within 72 hours of exposure to the measles virus to protect against disease. If the disease does subsequently develop, symptoms are usually less severe, and the duration of illness may be shortened.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from South Africa. ------------------------------------------------------1. A confirmed measles outbreak is defined in Expanded Programme on Immunisation Diseases Surveillance Guide 3rd Edition (2015) as the occurrence of three or more confirmed measles cases (at least two of which should be laboratory- confirmed; IgM positive) in a health facility/ district/ sub-district (approximate catchment population of 100 000) in a month. The cases in Eastern Cape do not meet this outbreak definition. 2. The SADC is composed of 16 member states: https://www.sadc.int › member-states.3. While seroconversion rates are lower when MCV is given at 6 months, countries can decide to start at 6 months if the risk of disease is very high in infants. The capacity to reach high MCV2 coverage at 12 months will determine whether the strategy is appropriate or not, the risk being that if MCV2 coverage is low, large cohorts of unimmunized children will progressively build up.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (21 March 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles – South Africa. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON447 As shown in Figure-1, the number of cases increased sharply in the last week of December but started declining in the second week of January and continues to show a declining trend. Figure 2: Distribution of measles cases (n= 690) reported by district in Nepal between 24 November 2022 to 10 March 2023 The majority of cases (n=591; 86%) have been less than 15 years old. However, nine measles cases have also been observed in the older age group (≥ 45 years) with the maximum age of a case being 73 years.Figure 3: Age distribution and vaccination status of measles cases in Nepal from 24 November 2022 to 10 March 2023Epidemiology of measlesThe Ministry of Health (MoH), with support from WHO, partners and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), have implemented response measures. These include:While measles is endemic in Nepal and is reported every year, the magnitude and extent of the current outbreak are unusually high compared to the previous years. Only sporadic isolated measles cases have occurred since 2004, when a substantial outbreak of 12 074 cases was reported. Based on the current data and available information, the overall risk of measles at the national level is assessed as high due to the following reasons:Factors including the spread of the outbreak to neighboring districts and provinces, the detection of measles cases in a highly mobile population and minority communities, the low population immunity in affected districts, and cross-border movement, indicates the risk of intra- and inter-provincial as well as international spread of measles.The risk at regional level is assessed to be moderate (persistent endemic transmission on both sides of a porous international border), and low at the global level.  Measles is preventable by vaccination, which provides lifelong immunity in most recipients. Vaccination against measles is recommended for all susceptible children and adults for whom the vaccine is not contraindicated. National immunization programs must assure the safe provision of immunization services that can reach all children with two doses of measles vaccine. In countries with moderate to weak health systems, regular measles immunization campaigns can protect children who do not have access to routine health services. WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV vaccine and strengthening integrated epidemiological surveillance of measles and rubella in order to achieve the timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities. It is critical to quickly recognize and treat complications of measles in order to reduce severity of the disease and mortality . Severe complications from measles can be reduced through supportive care that ensures good nutrition, adequate fluid intake and treatment of dehydration with WHO-recommended oral rehydration solution. This solution replaces fluids and other essential elements that are lost through diarrhea or vomiting. Antibiotics should be prescribed to treat eye and ear infections, and pneumonia. While there is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, prompt provision of vitamin A in therapeutic doses is recommended to reduce complications and mortality among infected children.Healthcare workers should be vaccinated in order to avoid infections acquired in a healthcare setting.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Nepal based on the information available for this event.1Microplanning for immunization service delivery using the Reaching Every District (RED) strategy: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/70450Citable reference: World Health Organization (14 March 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles - Nepal. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON446  Situation at a glanceOn 23 February 2023, the Cambodia International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point (NFP) reported one confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus to WHO. A second case, a family contact of the first case, was reported on 24 February 2023. An outbreak investigation is ongoing including determining the exposure of these two reported cases to the virus.These are the first two cases of avian influenza A (H5N1) reported from Cambodia since 2014. In December 2003, Cambodia reported an outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) H5N1 for the first time affecting wild birds. Since then, and until 2014, human cases due to poultry-to-human transmission have been sporadically reported in Cambodia.H5N1 infection in humans can cause severe disease, has a high mortality rate, and is notifiable under IHR (2005). Description of the casesOn 23 February 2023, the IHR NFP of Cambodia notified WHO of a confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus. The case was an 11-year-old girl from Prey Veng province, in the south of Cambodia. On 16 February 2023, the case developed symptoms and received treatment at a local hospital. On 21 February 2023, the case was admitted to the National Pediatric Hospital with severe pneumonia. A sample was collected the same day through the severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) sentinel system and tested positive for avian influenza A (H5N1) virus by the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Institute of Public Health on the same day. The sample was also sent to Institute Pasteur Cambodia, the National Influenza Center, which confirmed the finding. The patient died on 22 February 2023. Cambodia shared the genetic sequence data of the virus from the index case through the publicly accessible database GISAID. Virus sequencing shows the H5N1 virus belongs to clade 2.3.2.1c, and similar to the 2.3.2.1c clade viruses circulating in poultry in southeast Asia since 2014.A total of twelve close contacts (eight asymptomatic close contacts and four symptomatic who met the suspected case definition) of the index case were identified and samples were collected and tested. Laboratory investigations confirmed the second case on 23 February 2023, the father of the index child. The father, who is asymptomatic, is in isolation at the referral hospital. The eleven other samples tested negative for A (H5N1) and SARS-CoV-2.As of 25 February 2023, a total of 58 cases of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus have been reported in Cambodia since 2003, including 38 deaths (CFR 66%); nine cases and seven deaths between 2003 to 2009 and 47 cases and 30 deaths between 2010 to 2014 were reported. A joint animal-human health investigation is underway in the province of the index case to identify the source and mode of transmission. Additionally, a high-level government response is underway to contain any further spread of the virus.  These are the first human infections reported in Cambodia since 2014. Human infection can cause severe disease and has a high mortality rate. Almost all Influenza A (H5N1) infection cases in people have been associated with close contact with infected live or dead birds, or Influenza A (H5N1)-contaminated environments. Based on evidence so far, the virus does not infect humans easily and spreads from person-to-person appears to be unusual. An outbreak investigation is ongoing including identifying the source of exposure of the two reported cases to the virus.Since the virus continues to be detected in poultry populations, further human cases can be expected.Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, there is a risk for sporadic infection or small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. From 2003 to 25 February 2023, a total of 873 human cases of infection with influenza A (H5N1) and 458 deaths have been reported globally from 21 countries.Public health measures from both the human and animal health agencies have been implemented including monitoring of contacts of the laboratory-confirmed cases. While further characterization of the virus from these human cases is pending, available epidemiological and virological evidence suggest that current A(H5) viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of sustained human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information so far, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low.The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed as further epidemiological or virological information becomes available.Vaccines against avian influenza A (H5N1) for human use have been developed for pandemic use but are not widely available. WHO, through its Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) monitors the evolution of the virus, conducts risk assessment, and recommends the development of additional new candidate vaccine viruses for pandemic preparedness purposes.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses (human and poultry) and serological investigations are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures promptly.Given reports of sporadic influenza A (H5N1) cases in humans, the widespread circulation in birds and the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, people involved in high-risk tasks such as sampling sick birds, culling, and disposing of infected birds, eggs, litter and cleaning of contaminated premises should be provided with and trained in the proper use of appropriate personal protective equipment. All persons involved in these tasks should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for seven days following the last day of contact with infected poultry or their environments. In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiological investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.Currently, there is no vaccine widely available to protect against avian influenza in humans. WHO recommends that all people involved in work with poultry or birds should have a seasonal influenza vaccination to reduce the potential risk of reassortment. Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. General precautions include regular hand washing and good food safety and food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as on the basis of available information, this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event. WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (26 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Avian Influenza A (H5N1) - Cambodia. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON445Situation at a glance On 7 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea reported the deaths of a number of individuals with suspected hemorrhagic fever.On 12 February 2023, one sample was confirmed positive for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), at the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal.Investigations are ongoing to find additional cases. WHO is supporting the response by strengthening contact tracing, case management, infection prevention and control, laboratory, risk communication and community engagement.WHO assesses the risk posed by the outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.Description of the situationThis is the first Marburg virus disease (MVD) outbreak reported in Equatorial Guinea.On 7 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea reported at least eight deaths that occurred between 7 January and 7 February 2023, in two villages located in the district of Nsock Nsomo, eastern province of Kie-Ntem, Río Muni Region. According to the ongoing epidemiological investigation, the cases presented with fever, followed by weakness, vomiting, and blood-stained diarrhoea; two cases also presented with skin lesions and otorrhagia (bleeding from the ear).On 9 February 2023, eight blood samples were collected from contacts and sent to the Centre Interdisciplinaire de Recherches Médicales de Franceville (CIRMF) in Gabon, where they tested negative for both Ebola and Marburg viruses by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).An additional eight blood samples were collected from other contacts and sent to the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal, on 12 February 2023. One of these samples was taken from a suspected case that was confirmed positive for Marburg virus by RT-PCR. This case presented with fever, non-bloody vomiting, bloody diarrhoea, and convulsions and died on 10 February 2023 at Ebebiyin District Hospital. The case also had epidemiological links to four deceased cases from one of the villages in Nsoc-Nsomo district.As of 21 February 2023, the cumulative number of cases is nine, including one confirmed case, four probable cases and four suspected cases. All the cases have died, one in a health facility and the other eight in the community. There are no cases among healthcare workers. Thirty-four contacts are currently under follow-up.Epidemiology of Marburg virus diseaseMarburg virus is the causative agent of Marburg virus disease (MVD), which has a case-fatality ratio of up to 88%. Marburg virus disease was initially detected in 1967 after simultaneous outbreaks in Marburg and Frankfurt in Germany, and in Belgrade, Serbia.Rousettus aegyptiacus fruit bats are considered natural hosts for Marburg virus, from which the virus is then transmitted to people.Marburg spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg.The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea and vomiting can begin on the third day. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations appear between five and seven days from symptoms onset, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between eight and nine days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral haemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, including Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague. Laboratory confirmation can be made by different tests, such as antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), antigen-capture detection tests, serum neutralization test, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, electron microscopy, and virus isolation by cell culture. Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.This is the first time that Equatorial Guinea has reported an outbreak of MVD. The most recently reported outbreak of MVD was in Ghana in 2022 (three confirmed cases). Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).Equatorial Guinea is facing an outbreak of MVD for the first time and the country's capacity to manage the outbreak is insufficient.Based on available information, all nine deceased cases were in contact with a relative with the same symptoms or participated in a burial of a person with symptoms compatible with MVD. At this stage it cannot be ruled out that all MVD cases have been identified, therefore there could be transmission chains that have not been tracked. To date, most of the contacts of the nine deceased cases have not been identified.It should also be noted that with the exception of one case who died in a health facility, the other eight died in the community and their burial conditions are unknown.Cross-border population movements are frequent, and the borders are very porous, between Ebebiyin and Nsock Nsomo districts (Equatorial Guinea), Cameroon and Gabon. This constitutes a risk of cross-border spread.Considering the above described scenario, the risk is considered high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.Marburg virus disease outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, namely case management, surveillance including contact tracing, a good laboratory service, infection prevention and control including safe and dignified burials, and social mobilization. Community engagement is key to successfully controlling MVD outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Marburg infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission.Communities affected by Marburg should make efforts to ensure that the population is well informed, both about the nature of the disease itself and about necessary outbreak containment measures.Outbreak containment measures include prompt, safe and dignified burial of the deceased cases, identifying people who may have been in contact with someone infected with Marburg and monitoring their health for 21 days, isolating and providing care to confirmed patients and maintaining good hygiene and a clean environment.Healthcare workers caring for patients with or suspected of MVD should apply additional infection control measures in addition to standard precautions to avoid contact with patients’ blood and body fluids and with surfaces and objects contaminated.WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex and hygiene for 12 months from onset of symptoms or until their semen twice tests negative for Marburg virus. Contact with body fluids should be avoided and washing with soap and water is recommended. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for Marburg virus.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Equatorial Guinea based on available information for the current outbreak.Citable reference: World Health Organization (25 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg virus disease - Equatorial Guinea. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON444Situation at a glanceIn Mozambique, an outbreak of cholera has been growing exponentially since December 2022 with geographic spread to new districts. Heavy rainfall in the first weeks of February threatens to further worsen the situation.The first case of cholera in the current outbreak was reported to the Ministry of Health and WHO from Lago district in Niassa province on 14 September 2022. As of 19 February 2023, a cumulative total of 5237 suspected cases and 37 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) 0.7%) have been reported in 29 districts from six out of 11 provinces in the country. Of the at least 182 cases tested, 99 cases (54%) were laboratory confirmed for cholera by culture.All six provinces currently affected by cholera are flood-prone areas. As the rainy season continues, it is anticipated that more districts will be affected. With this outbreak, cholera has affected many districts that had not reported any cases in over five years and where, as a result, the response capacity is limited.In addition, there is inadequate access to sources of safe drinking water for the population that is already challenged with poor hygiene and sanitation.Mozambique is one of many countries in the region facing a cholera outbreak at the moment. Notably, neighbouring Malawi is facing the deadliest cholera outbreak in its history. Considering the frequency of cross-border movement and the history of cross-border spread of cholera during this outbreak, WHO considers the risk of further disease spread as very high at the national and regional levels. Description of the outbreakThe first case of cholera in the current outbreak was reported to the Ministry of Health and WHO from Lago district in Niassa province on 14 September 2022.  As of 19 February 2023, a cumulative total of 5237 suspected cases and 37 deaths (CFR 0.7%) have been reported in 29 districts from six of 11 provinces in the country. Of at least 182 cases tested, 99 cases (54%) were laboratory confirmed for cholera due to the identification of Vibrio cholerae Ogawa by culture. As of 19 February, eight districts (Chimbonila, Lago, Lichinga, Mandimba, Mecanhelas, Muembe, Ngauma and Sanga) of Niassa province (north of the country) reported 2525 cases and 16 deaths (CFR 0.6 %).  In the central region of the country, nine districts (Beira, Buzi, Caia, Cheringoma, Chibabava, Gorongoza, Maringue, Marromeu, Muanza) of Sofala province reported 1354 cases and three deaths (CFR 0.2 %). Nine districts (Angonia, Cahora Bassa, Chiuta, Doa, Marara, Moatize, Mutarara, Tete, Tsangano) from Tete province, reported 1271 cases with 12 deaths (CFR 0.9%) since December 2022. Zambezia province (Milange district) bordering Malawi reported 14 cases. In the southern region of the country, one district (Xai-Xai) in Gaza province, reported 42 cases and four deaths (CFR 9.5%).  In addition, one district (Tambara) in Manica province, reported 34 cases and two deaths (CFR 5.9%).Additionally, four districts from three provinces (Tete – two, Zambezia – one, and Cabo-Delgado – one) have reported cases of Acute Watery Diarrhoea (AWD) that were positive for cholera by Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) with culture results pending. Notably, in the last 30 days the districts reporting cholera and AWD are increasing, with three new provinces reporting confirmed cholera. Prior to the current outbreak, there were cholera outbreaks in eight districts in three provinces during the first half of 2022, which were declared over. The current outbreak of cholera in Mozambique covers a wider geographic area and has a higher CFR compared with the previous outbreak. Moreover, most of the affected districts, especially in Niassa province, had not reported cholera cases for more than five years and many of the health professionals do not have experience in responding to a cholera outbreak. Weak surveillance with late reporting, inadequate WASH conditions (lack of access to safe drinking water, poor sanitation and hygiene practices), a weak health system and exhausted workforce responding to multiple emergencies pose a threat to continued disease progression, as do the ongoing heavy rains of the season.Figure 1. Cholera cases reported by week and province in Mozambique from 14 September 2022 to 19 February 2023* * The 14 cases from Zambezia district are not indicated figure 1Figure 2. The cumulative number of cholera cases per 100 000 population in Mozambique by reporting districts as of 19 February 2023 Epidemiology of choleraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS).The consequences of a humanitarian crisis or disasters like flooding– such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.Since the outbreak was declared in September 2022, a national cholera task force was activated and WHO, along with other partners, is supporting the response. Specific actions undertaken include:Coordination:Epidemiological surveillance and laboratory:Case management:Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)/Water, Hygiene and Sanitation (WASH):Risk communication and community engagement:Vaccination:Cholera is endemic in Mozambique and cholera outbreaks have been reported in the country every year during the hot and rainy season (October to April), mainly from Nampula, Cabo Delgado, Sofala and Tete provinces. However, the current outbreak has greater geographical extent than outbreaks reported in 2019-2022, when no more than three provinces were affected during the year.  The first cholera case of the current outbreak was reported from Lago district on 14 September 2022, Niassa province, located in the northern region of the country, which shares a border with Malawi and Tanzania.All six provinces currently affected by cholera are located in the Zambezia Valley, which is a flood-prone area. As the rainy season continues, it is anticipated that more districts will be affected. The rainy season lasts until March-April, usually with a peak of rainfall recorded in January and early February. Heavy rainfall has already been reported in seven out of eleven provinces in the first weeks of February (31 January to 9 February), with flooding in Maputo province leading to displacement and disruption of the water supply system. There is inadequate access to safe drinking water sources for the population that is already challenged with poor hygiene and sanitation and the current rainy season could contribute to sustained disease transmission. Several affected provinces, such as Niassa, Tete and Zambezia, are bordering Malawi, which is currently facing its deadliest cholera outbreak in history. The borders with Malawi are porous with frequent movement across the border between the two countries.On 26 January 2023, Zambia notified WHO of a cholera outbreak in its Eastern Province bordering Malawi and Mozambique, where one of the two index cases had just returned from Mozambique. There remains a high risk of spread to other countries in the region, including Tanzania and Zimbabwe and further to South Africa. Considering the history of cross-border spread of cholera during this outbreak, the risk of further disease spread is therefore considered very high at the national and regional levels. A multi-pronged approach is essential to combat cholera and reduce mortality. The measures used combine surveillance, improvement of water supply, sanitation and hygiene, risk communication and community engagement, treatment of the disease and use of oral cholera vaccines. Countries affected by cholera are advised to strengthen disease surveillance and national preparedness to rapidly detect and respond to possible outbreaks.WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities.Promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health risk communication messages are a key element for a successful response.  Promoting hand hygiene, use of toilets and food safety are effective means of preventing cholera. Serious symptoms and deaths can be prevented by ensuring communities understand the importance of ensuring people with cholera symptoms are well hydrated using oral rehydration solution and rapidly seeking care. Socio-behavioural data should be collected to understand community knowledge, risk perception, levels of trust, rumours and misinformation, behaviours, attitudes and practices; this data should be used to drive risk communication and community engagement activities and to inform those of other response pillars. Feedback systems should be established to enable those affected by the outbreak and response efforts to have two way communication with responders, with regular responses to their feedback to maintain trust.Measures aimed at improving environmental conditions include applying long-term sustainable solutions for safe water supply, sanitation and hygiene in cholera-prone areas. Communities should be proactively engaged in the planning and implementation of these solutions. In addition to cholera, these interventions can also prevent a wide range of other water-borne diseases and contribute to achieving goals in education and the fight against poverty and malnutrition. Solutions for safe water supply, sanitation and hygiene related to cholera are in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.Rapid access to treatment is essential during a cholera outbreak. Oral rehydration solution should be available in communities and not just in larger health centers that can offer intravenous infusions and management at any time. Where these are not easily available, communities should be informed of how to make the solution at home and of the importance of keeping hydration high while seeking care for people with cholera. With rapid and appropriate care, the case fatality rate should remain below 1%.The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Risk communication and community engagement activities should be conducted to manage vaccine demand and raise awareness of vaccination campaigns. If a single dose schedule is being used, communication is needed to inform communities of why the dose schedule has changed and to share information on safety and efficacy.WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread.As this outbreak is occurring in border areas where there is significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages the countries concerned to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing. Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera - Mozambique. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON443Situation at a glance Nipah virus infection outbreaks are seasonal in Bangladesh, with cases usually occurring annually between December and May. Since the report of the first case in 2001, the number of yearly cases has ranged from zero to 67, though in the last five years, reported cases have been comparatively lower ranging from zero in 2016 to eight in 2019. However, since 4 January 2023 and as of 13 February 2023, 11 cases (10 confirmed and one probable) including eight deaths (Case Fatality Rate (CFR) 73%) have been reported across two divisions in Bangladesh.A multisectoral response has been implemented by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Bangladesh, including strengthened surveillance activities, case management, infection prevention and control, and implementation of risk communication campaigns.WHO assesses the risk as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level. Description of the casesSince 2001, Bangladesh has been reporting seasonal outbreaks of Nipah virus infection between December and May, corresponding with the harvesting season of date palm sap (DPS) occurring in the country from November to March. Reported cases ranged from zero (in 2002, 2006 and 2016) to 67 (in 2004). A lower number of reported cases was observed from 2016 following an extensive advocacy campaign against the consumption of raw date palm sap (Figure 1).However, between 4 January to 13 February 2023, a total of 11 (ten confirmed and one probable) cases of Nipah virus infection including eight deaths (CFR 73%) were reported from seven districts across two divisions in Bangladesh. This is the highest number of cases since 2015 when 15 cases including 11 deaths were reported.Ten of the 11 reported cases were laboratory confirmed, while samples could not be collected from one case before death and is therefore considered a probable case based on epidemiological linkage. Laboratory confirmation of Nipah virus infection was carried out through Real Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) using samples from throat swabs and antibody detection via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Confirmatory tests were done at the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) and International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh, (ICDDR, B) laboratories.Six cases were reported from Dhaka Division including four deaths from the districts of Narsingdi (one case who died), Rajbari (four cases including three deaths) and Shariatpur (one case). Rajshahi Division reported five cases including four deaths from the districts of Naogaon (two cases including one death), Natore (one case who died), Pabna (one case who died), and Rajshahi (one case who died) (Figure 2).Figure 1. Number of reported Nipah virus cases and deaths by year, 1 January 2001 – 13 February 2023, Bangladesh.Figure 2. Distribution of Nipah Virus cases and surveillance sites (2001 – 2023) [Left] and Nipah cases in 2023 [Right].Of the eleven cases reported, four were females and seven were males. The median age of cases is 16 years old, ranging from 15 days to 50 years. Of the 11 cases, ten had a history of consuming date palm sap while one case, a 15-day old infant is considered a secondary case.Estimated incubation period of these cases ranged from 3 to 15 days with a median of 14 days. All of the 11 cases were hospitalized following the onset of symptoms.A total of 310 contacts have been identified around the 11 cases and are monitored for 3 weeks from the last date of possible exposure.Epidemiology of Nipah virus infectionNipah virus infection is an emerging bat-borne zoonotic disease transmitted to humans through infected animals or contaminated food. It can also be transmitted directly from person to person through close contact with an infected person. Fruit bats or flying foxes (Pteropus species) are the natural hosts for Nipah virus.The incubation period is believed to range from 4 to 14 days. However, an incubation period up to 45 days has been reported. Laboratory diagnosis of a patient with a clinical history of Nipah virus infection can be made during the acute and convalescent phases of the disease by using a combination of tests. The main tests used are RT-PCR from bodily fluids and antibody detection via ELISA.Nipah virus infection in humans causes a range of clinical presentations, from asymptomatic infection (subclinical) to acute respiratory infection and fatal encephalitis. Infected people initially develop symptoms including fever, headaches, myalgia (muscle pain), vomiting, and sore throat. This can be followed by dizziness, drowsiness, altered consciousness, and neurological signs that indicate acute encephalitis. Some people can also experience atypical pneumonia and severe respiratory problems, including acute respiratory distress. Encephalitis and seizures occur in severe cases, progressing to coma within 24 to 48 hours. Most people who survive acute encephalitis make a full recovery, but long-term neurologic conditions have been reported in survivors. Approximately 20% of patients are left with residual neurological consequences such as seizure disorder and personality changes. A small number of people who recover subsequently relapse or develop delayed onset encephalitis.The overall global case fatality rate is estimated at 40% to 75% depending on local capabilities for epidemiological surveillance and clinical management. Although antivirals are in development, there are no licensed vaccines or therapeutics available for the prevention or treatment of Nipah virus infection.The following public health response has been implemented by the government of Bangladesh.Coordination:Surveillance:Case Management:Infection Prevention and Control:Risk Communication and Community Engagement:The overall risk is assessed by WHO as high at the national level due to the following reasons:The risk at the regional level is moderate as Rajshahi district borders India. Although there have not been any instances of cross-border transmission by humans previously, this risk remains given the shared ecological corridor for the virus’s natural host (fruit bats or flying foxes) and occurrence among domestic animals and humans previously in both countries. India also has experienced previous outbreaks of Nipah virus infection.The risk assessed at the global level is low considering the absence of natural hosts in many countries and the fact that there have been no previous cases outside Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and Singapore.In the absence of a vaccine or licensed treatment available for Nipah virus infection, the only way to reduce or prevent infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating about the measures persons can take to reduce exposure to the Nipah virus. Case management should focus on the delivery of supportive care measures to patients. Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.Public health educational messages should focus on:Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission: Efforts to prevent transmission should first focus on decreasing bat access to date palm sap and other fresh food products. Freshly collected date palm juice should be boiled, and fruits should be thoroughly washed and peeled before consumption. Fruits with signs of bat bites should be discarded. Areas where bats are known to roost should be avoided. The risk of international transmission via fruit or fruit products (such as raw date palm juice) contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit bats can be prevented by washing them thoroughly and peeling them before consumption.Reducing the risk of animal-to-human transmission: Natural infection in domestic animals has been described in farming pigs, horses, goats, sheep, but also in dogs and cats. Gloves and other protective clothing should be worn while handling sick animals or their tissues, and during slaughtering and culling procedures. As much as possible, people should avoid being in contact with infected pigs. In endemic areas, when establishing new pig farms, considerations should be given to the presence of fruit bats in the area and in general, pig feed and pig sheds should be protected against bats when feasible. Samples taken from animals with suspected Nipah virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories. Nipah virus infection can be prevented by avoiding exposure to bats and sick animals in endemic areas, and by avoiding consuming fruits partially eaten by infected bats or drinking raw date palm sap/toddy/juice.Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission: Close unprotected physical contact with Nipah virus-infected people should be avoided. Regular hand washing should be carried out after caring for or visiting sick people. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed infection, or handling their specimens, should implement standard infection control precautions at all times. As human-to-human transmission has been reported among caregivers including family members and in health-care settings, contact and droplet precautions should be used in addition to standard precautions. Airborne precautions may be required in certain circumstances.Citable reference: World Health Organization (17 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Nipah virus disease – Bangladesh. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON442Current Situation                                                                            Since the first disease outbreak news on the global cholera situation was published on 16 December 2022, the global situation has further deteriorated with additional countries reporting cases and outbreaks.Since mid-2021, the world is facing an acute upsurge of the 7th cholera pandemic characterized by the number, size and concurrence of multiple outbreaks, the spread to areas free of cholera for decades and alarming high mortality rates.In 2021, 23 countries reported cholera outbreaks, mainly in the WHO Regions of Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean. This trend continued into 2022 as 30 countries across five of the six WHO regions reported cholera cases or outbreaks. Among those, 14 had not reported cholera in 2021, including non-endemic countries (Lebanon and Syria)i,ii or countries that had not reported cases over three years (Haiti and the Dominican Republic), while most of the remaining countries reported higher case numbers and case fatality ratios (CFR) than in previous years.As of 1 February 2023, at least 18 countries continue to report cholera cases (Table 1 A & B). As according to the seasonality patterns large parts of the world are in currently in low or interepidemic transmission period this number could increase in the months to come.The mortality associated to those outbreaks is of particular concern as many countries reported higher CFR than in previous years. The average cholera CFR reported globally in 2021 was 1.9% (2.9% in Africa), a significant increase above acceptable (<1%) and the highest recorded in over a decade. Preliminary data suggests similar trend for 2022 and 2023.  The potential drivers of the outbreaks and challenges impacting response activities were highlighted in the last Disease Outbreak News. The simultaneous progression of several cholera outbreaks, compounded in countries facing complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems and aggravated by climate change, poses challenges to outbreak response and risks further spreading to other countries.The overall capacity to respond to the multiple and simultaneous outbreaks continues to be strained due to the global lack of resources, including the oral cholera vaccine, as well as overstretched public health and medical personnel, who are dealing with multiple disease outbreaks at the same time.Based on the current situation, including the increasing number of outbreaks and their geographic expansion, as well as a lack of vaccines and other resources, WHO assesses the risk at the global level as very high.EpidemiologyCholera is an acute diarrheal infection. When severe, it is characterized by extreme watery diarrhoea and potentially fatal dehydration. It is caused by the ingestion of food or water contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It has a short incubation period, ranging between twelve hours and five days. Most people will develop no or mild to moderate symptoms; about 20% of ill persons develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration and are at risk of death. Despite being easily treatable with rehydration solution, cholera remains a global health threat due to its high morbidity and mortality in vulnerable populations without access to adequate health care.Seven distinct pandemics of cholera have been recorded over the past two centuries. The seventh pandemic, which is still going on now, is considered to have started in 1961.  During the first two decades, following (re)introduction, many countries transitioned to becoming cholera-endemic. While global incidence greatly decreased in the late 1990s, cholera remains prevalent in parts of Africa and Asia.Figure-1: Global situation of active epidemics of cholera and acute watery diarrhoea as of 1 February 2023Note: Countries in white are not reporting ongoing cholera outbreaks as of 1 February 2023. Figure-2: Cholera cases* reported to WHO by year and continent, global CFR, 1989-2021*** In 2017 and 2019, Yemen accounted for 84% and 93% of all cholera cases respectively (Weekly Epidemiological Report 2018, 2020).**The data for 2022 is not included in the epidemic curve due to (i) incompleteness  (ii) provisional estimates. Official reporting of case counts per country to WHO is expected at the end of the year and remains to be consolidated for the annual report.To note: data on cholera are often incomplete and underreporting is common. Several countries do not have reporting systems for cholera. This is why complete lists of countries with outbreaks, and accurate case and death counts cannot be provided.In the table below, countries under monitoring are described. These include countries with active outbreaks of cholera and those which reported outbreaks in 2022. Other factors including the length of the outbreak, the size of vulnerable populations, and the overall contextual challenges are also taken into consideration.WHO Region of Africa: The ongoing conflict in the province of North Kivu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) led to an increased influx of internally displaced people (IDPs) to camps close to Goma, during the last months of 2022. The lack of access to water and sanitation in the camps fueled the ongoing cholera outbreak. Additionally, the rainy season is worsening the cholera situation in other eastern provinces, increasing the risk of regional spread. Burundi recently declared a cholera outbreak in the city of Bujumbura, along the shores of Lake Tanganyika and near the border with the province of South Kivu in DRC. While the number of reported cases in some countries with widespread outbreaks in 2022, such as Cameroon and Nigeria, is currently declining, the situation in Malawi continues to deteriorate in early 2023 as it reports over 600 new cases per day. The country is experiencing its deadliest cholera outbreak in history with a continually high CFR (>3%) since March 2022. In addition, neighbouring Mozambique has registered a sharp increase in cases and alerts since mid-December 2022, with cases reported from five provinces, including provinces bordering Malawi.On 26 January 2023, Zambia notified WHO of a cholera outbreak in the Eastern province bordering Malawi and Mozambique. There remains a high risk of spread to other countries in the region, including Tanzania and Zimbabwe. Additionally, three countries in the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia in the Eastern Mediterranean Region) are reporting ongoing cholera outbreaks. The continued drought is driving population movements which increase the risk of spread of cholera, and high levels of malnutrition, which increase the risk of severe outcomes of cholera in the region. There are multiple graded emergencies and stretched resource and human capacity due to other public health emergencies (COVID-19, mpox, malnutrition). Many affected areas are highly insecure and there is limited access to the population, which has limited access to healthcare. Climate change is leading to drought in some areas in Africa, and floods in others, resulting in increased population displacement and reduced access to clean water. High CFRs were reported from multiple outbreaks. There is high risk of regional spread in both Southern Africa with the rainy/cyclone season approaching and in the Lake Chad basin where there is limited response capacity due to insecurity.WHO Region of the Americas: The situation in Haiti’s Ouest Department (which includes the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince) is stabilizing. The department reported a third of the confirmed cases reported during the October-November 2022 peak. However, the outbreak is not yet under control and suspected and confirmed cases of cholera continue to be reported in all ten departments of the country. In addition, imported cases and limited local transmission are being reported from Santo Domingo, the capital of neighbouring Dominican Republic.The mobility of the local population – although restricted because of the severe insecurity in the country and lack of fuel – represents a continued risk of national and international spread. Additional exportations from Haiti to other countries and territories in the Region of the Americas are possible. According to the 2 December 2022 AMRO rapid risk assessment the risk in Hispaniola is evaluated as Very High and the regional risk is assessed as Moderate. Efforts are ongoing to improve surveillance and laboratory capacity in the region. A cholera vaccination campaign is underway on Hispaniola Island.WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region: Weak surveillance systems (e.g. sentinel, hospital-based surveillance) in many countries of the region make the interpretation of data challenging. The region is characterized by stretched staff capacity due to complex humanitarian crises, and emigration of trained staff.  The outbreaks in the region are spreading, with population movement exacerbated by conflict, climate change, droughts, and flooding. In 2022, the first cholera outbreak in over 10 years was reported in Lebanon and Syria, while Pakistan recorded its largest outbreak in decades.  Cases in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Pakistan and Somalia are currently declining, and other countries in the region which reported outbreaks in 2022, such as Iraq and IR Iran, remain under monitoring.  The widespread outbreak continues in parts of Syrian Arab Republic, and risk of further spread to other countries in the region and beyond persist.WHO European Region: Cholera is not endemic in the WHO European Region. Current robust public health systems, including access to adequate hygiene and sanitation standards at community and healthcare facilities coupled with surveillance and response capacities, lower the risk of further transmission following importation. However, countries bordering Syria and Lebanon, where large ongoing outbreaks are reported, may have a heightened risk of introduction and onward transmission in particular settings e.g., amongst refugee and displaced persons (Türkiye). A heightened risk of cholera outbreaks in Türkiye should be anticipated given the recent large earthquake that struck the southern and central parts of the country on 6 February 2023, and has had a devastating impact on infrastructure. In addition, in November 2022, Israel reported to WHO the detection of toxigenic Vibrio cholerae O1 in environmental samples from the Yarmuch stream upon its entry into Israel. Israel has taken substantive proactive measures to prevent cholera introduction and transmission and, as a result, the overall risk is considered low. The ongoing war in Ukraine stands to further worsen environmental and sanitary conditions and weaken health infrastructure in this area, however, cholera occurrence is of lower risk during winter months.In November of 2022, WHO European Region IHR invited Member States to report any imported or autochthonous case of cholera on an ad hoc basis to support global outbreak monitoring.  As of 27 December 2022, 28 cases of cholera have been reported to WHO by eight European Region Member States, of which 24 were linked with travel to cholera-affected countries.WHO South-East Asia Region: The expected post-monsoon peak in 2022 was not apparent. Low-level transmission continues in Cox’s Bazaar in Bangladesh in 2023, particularly among Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals (FDMN). Both India and Nepal, which reported outbreaks in 2022, remain under monitoring. There is limited surveillance (often sentinel-based) and low reporting. There is continued risk of export to other regions.WHO Western Pacific Region: In the Philippines, recurrent cholera outbreaks were reported in 2022 with a cumulative number of recorded cases three times higher than in 2021.  While countries of the region have overall good control capacity, there is inadequate monitoring of drinking water quality.Table 1A & B. Summary of reported ongoing cholera outbreaks as of January 2023 WHO is working with partners at global, regional & country level to support Member States in the following cholera outbreak response activities:CoordinationSurveillanceVaccinationCase managementInfection Prevention and Control (IPC)Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE)Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)Operations, Support, and Logistics (OSL)The risk of cholera is not equally distributed between regions, countries or within countries. The risk of cholera increases with decreasing access to clean water and sanitation.However, there are a number of outbreaks occurring simultaneously across all six WHO regions (the African Region, the Region of the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean Region, the European Region,iii the South-East Asia Region,iv the Western Pacific Region), which are straining the overall epidemic response capacity. Protracted cholera outbreaks are exhausting public health response personnel and depleting global and local resources.Several countries including Cameroon, Ethiopia, Haiti, Lebanon, Nigeria (north-east of the country), Pakistan, Somalia, Syria and the Democratic Republic of Congo (eastern part of the country) are in the midst of complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems, inadequate access to clean water and sanitation and have insufficient capacity to respond to the outbreaks. Climate change and a lack of development are also contributing to outbreaks.In addition, many affected countries have highly mobile populations that may spread cholera to neighbouring countries (e.g. high risk of spread between Malawi and Mozambique, and to Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe; the surge in cases in DRC’s North and South Kivu provinces increases the risk for spread to Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda; in Somalia, the uncontrolled cross-border movement of people, including refugees/asylum seekers with neighbouring countries especially Ethiopia, Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen; heavy population movement between Pakistan-Afghanistan, Iraq-Iran; the outbreak from Syria has spread to Lebanon with a continued risk of spread into Jordan). There is also a risk of spreading to currently unaffected areas by international travel to countries such as Sierra Leone and Liberia, which are at high risk for cholera outbreaks. After at least 10 reported imported cases from Haiti between October 2022 and January 2023, the neighbouring Dominican Republic continues to report cases linked to local transmission in 2023. There is the risk of further spread in the Americas. Cross-border population movements and increased global travel following the lefting of COVID-19-related restrictions, increase the risk of further international spread.In October 2022, the ICG made the unprecedented decision to temporarily suspend the second dose of OCV for outbreak response, due to the global shortage of OCV, which continues in 2023. Although effective, the single-dose strategy will result in a shortened duration of vaccine-induced immunity, particularly in children under five years of age, leaving the populations vulnerable to cholera the following year.Based on the current situation, in particular: 1) the increasing number of outbreaks and geographical expansion; 2) the complex humanitarian context of many crises; 3) continuous risk of spread; 4) lack of vaccines and limited response capacity (supplies, human resources), the risk at the global level is assessed as very high and cholera remains a global threat to public health and an indicator of inequity and lack of social development.WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of rapid hydration and care seeking behaviour for potential cholera cases and preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Listening to and understanding community concerns, needs, challenges and capacities and positioning communities as partners in the planning and implementation of response efforts is key. This includes understanding and addressing barriers that impact the uptake of protective behaviors, the impact of stigma and discrimination and trust in health systems, actors and authorities. Recognizing community knowledge and capacities and systematically involving communities in strengthening WASH, community-based surveillance, case management and safe and dignified burial practices will build trust and help align health system response efforts with community needs. Equipping health workers to work with communities to ensure rapid care seeking behaviour and to hold safe and dignified burials will be essential to maintain trust between communities and the health system.  The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Given the limited supply of OCV globally, RCCE and vaccine demand efforts should be a critical part of vaccination campaigns to ensure maximum uptake.WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of patients to less than 1%.WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Member States based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak also affects border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Member States to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing across all levels of the organization so that any spread across the border is quickly assessed and contained.Referencesi A cholera-endemic area is one where confirmed cholera cases were detected during the last three years with evidence of local transmission (i.e., the cases are not imported from elsewhere). A cholera outbreak/epidemic can occur in both endemic countries and in countries where cholera does not regularly occur.ii Lebanon and Syria were not identified as endemic. Source: Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC) Ending Cholera: a global roadmap to 2030 strategy.iii North-west Syriaiv Bangladesh  Citable reference: World Health Organization (11 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera – Global situation. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON437  Situation at a glanceSince January 2022 to 1 February 2023, health authorities in South Sudan are responding to an ongoing outbreak of measles, with 4339 suspected cases including 388 (8.9%) laboratory-confirmed cases and 46 deaths (case fatality ratio: 1.06%) reported across the country. Two outbreaks of measles were declared by the health authorities in 2022 on 23 February and 10 December, respectively. Between March and November 2022, a total of 770,581 children were vaccinated during reactive vaccination campaigns. A nationwide vaccination campaign against measles is planned to begin in March 2023.The current outbreak may have serious public health impacts due to the low national level of measles immunization coverage which is below the expected 95% coverage to interrupt the ongoing transmission. Other factors include the most affected age group being those under five years old, and the country context where there are armed conflicts, food insecurity and internally displaced people favoring transmission.Description of the situationHealth authorities in South Sudan have been responding to an outbreak of measles since the beginning of 2022. From 1 January 2022 to 1 February 2023, a total of 4339 suspected cases, of which 388 (8.9%) were laboratory-confirmed cases and 46 deaths (CFR: 1.06%; AR: 1.1/1000 population) have been reported from 55 counties in all of the 10 states and three administrative areas. Of the 4339 suspected cases, 3187 (73.5%) are unvaccinated. Among the unvaccinated, 2398 (75%) are under the age of five and 1021 (32%) are under the age of one. The highest cumulative number of deaths was recorded in Juba county in Central Equatoria state with 18 deaths (CFR 1.9%) and eight deaths (CFR 5.1%) reported in Cueibet county of Lakes state, while other counties reported less than five deaths in total.South Sudan started reporting measles cases in January 2022 in two counties -Torit in Eastern Equatoria State and Maban in Upper Nile State. Following a steady increase in the number of cases across the country, South Sudan’s health authorities declared a measles outbreak on 10 December 2022. This was the country’s second declaration of a measles outbreak after the first declaration on 23 February 2022.Figure 1: Distribution of suspected measles cases (n=4334) reported in South Sudan between 1 January 2022 and 1 February 2023 .Note: date of onset of disease was not known for five casesEpidemiology of measlesMeasles is a highly contagious disease caused by the measles virus and occurs as a seasonal disease in endemic areas. In tropical zones, most cases of measles occur during the dry season, whereas in temperate zones, incidence peaks during late winter and early spring.Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse within minutes when an infected person coughs or sneezes, and transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to 2 hours.  A patient is infectious four days before the start of the rash to four days after the appearance of the rash. The virus first infects the respiratory tract before spreading to other organs.  There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.Among malnourished children and immunocompromised people, including people with HIV, cancer and treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, and pneumoniaAlthough measles is highly contagious, an effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) is given at the age of nine months, while the second dose of measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.In countries with low administrative vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status. With support from WHO and partners, the Ministry of Health of South Sudan, has implemented response measures including enhancing measles surveillance and strengthening case management by reinforcing capacities of frontline healthcare workers, surveillance officers, and the state and county rapid response teams (RRT). In addition, response interventions include:In South Sudan, outbreaks of measles remain a concern due to insufficient vaccination coverage, the non-introduction of the second dose of MCV (MCV2) and the absence of supplementary vaccination activities against measles in some areas over the past three years.South Sudan is one of the African countries with the lowest measles immunization coverage, resulting in suboptimal population immunity. The 2020 WHO-UNICEF estimates of National Immunization Coverage (WUENIC) for the first dose of measles containing vaccine (MCV1) were estimated to be 49%. Based on the measles risk analysis conducted in March 2022, 49 counties out of 80 (69%) in 10 states and three administrative areas are classified as “very high risk” for measles transmission. All states and three administrative areas, except for the Western Equatoria, are classified as “very high risk”. The assessment found that out of 80 counties, eight (10%) have a low risk of measles and 12(15%) are classified as ‘medium’ risk when assessing population immunity. The remaining 60 counties (75%) are classified as either “high risk” or “very high risk” for measles. This risk analysis looked at several factors including population immunity, surveillance quality, immunization programme, and threat assessment (factors that might influence the risk for measles virus exposure and transmission in the population).Although most counties recorded very high administrative coverage for immunization for measles during reactive campaigns conducted between March and November 2022, vaccination quality was not determined by a post-campaign evaluation (PCE).Low routine immunization coverage (69%), far below the WHO recommended sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95%, is the main underlying cause of the multiple outbreaks in South Sudan. The low routine immunization is attributed to several factors including low access to basic healthcare estimated at 44%; insecurity that affects the functioning of health facilities; and inconsistent implementation of the basic package for nutrition and health services by public and partner-supported health facilities.South Sudan is also experiencing severe food insecurity with 57% of the population (6.54 million people) being affected. This has increased the risk of malnutrition in children, thereby increasing the risk of severe measles and adverse outcomes, especially those with vitamin A deficiency or whose immune systems have been weakened by HIV or other chronic diseases.Due to these multiple factors outlined above, the risk of spread of measles at the national level is assessed as high. At regional level, the risk is assessed to be moderate due to the cross-border movement of populations fleeing armed conflicts and insecurity in neighboring countries (Ethiopia, Sudan, Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Kenya) with suboptimal coverage of routine vaccination.The risk at the global level is considered as low given the existing response capacity in place.Vaccination against measles is recommended for all susceptible children and adults. Reaching all children with two doses of measles vaccine should be the standard for all national immunization programs. Countries aiming at measles elimination should achieve ≥95% coverage with both doses equitably to all children in every district.  Routine vaccination of children against measles, combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with high morbidity and mortality rates, are key public health strategies to reduce global measles deaths. Two doses of the vaccine are recommended to ensure immunity and prevent outbreaks, as about 15% of vaccinated children fail to develop immunity from the first dose.There is no specific treatment for measles. Case management of measles focuses on supportive care as well as the prevention and treatment of measles complications and secondary infections. Since measles is highly contagious, patient isolation is an important intervention to prevent further spread of the virus.Supportive care includes relieving common symptoms such as fever, cough, nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, and sore mouth. Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk of malnutrition due to diarrhea, vomiting and poor appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should be encouraged where appropriate. Oral rehydration salts should be used as needed to prevent dehydration.All children diagnosed with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A oral supplements, given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A; 50 000 IU should be given to infants aged less than six months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6–11 months, and 200 000 IU to children aged ≥12 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individuals, measles vaccine may be administered within 72 hours of exposure to measles virus to protect against disease. If disease does develop, symptoms are usually not severe, and the duration of illness is shortened.Healthcare workers should be vaccinated in order to avoid infections acquired in a healthcare setting.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to South Sudan based on the information available for this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (10 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles - South Sudan. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON440 Situation at a glanceCholera is endemic in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), including Ituri, North Kivu, South Kivu, and Tanganyika provinces, with cases reported through the year.On 14 December 2022, a cholera epidemic was officially declared by the Governor of the province of North Kivu, following the isolation of Vibrio cholerae among 140 of the 247 samples collected from suspected cases of Nyiragongo HZ.As of 4 February 2023, a total of 4386 cholera cases (of which 1009 are laboratory-confirmed) with 16 deaths (CFR 0.4%) have been reported.A multisectoral community-based response has been implemented, including a cholera vaccination campaign.Considering the fragile context in which this outbreak is taking place, ongoing armed conflicts with further displacements, concurrent epidemics, inadequate levels of access to health care, poor drinking water, hygienic and sanitary conditions, and population movements between the affected HZs and neighbouring countries (including Rwanda and Uganda), WHO assesses the risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national and regional level, and low at the global level. Description of the situationCholera is endemic in several provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).However, from mid-November to the end of 2022, there has been an upsurge in the number of reported cholera cases in the health zones of Nyiragongo and Karisimbi, in the province of North Kivu. Since then, cases have shown a declining trend (Figure 1).Figure 1. Number of cholera cases (suspected and confirmed) reported in Nyiragongo and Karisimbi health zones. Source: line list of Nyiragongo and Karisimbi Health Zones.In Nyiragongo, the number of new cholera cases (suspected and confirmed) increased from 51 in week 47 (21-27 November) to 556 cases in week 50 (12-18 December) of the year 2022, and to 683 cases in week 52 (December 26, 2022-January 1, 2023).On 14 December 2022, a cholera epidemic was officially declared by the Governor of the province of North Kivu, following isolation of Vibrio cholerae in the stool of 140 cases from Nyiragongo HZ at the local laboratory in Goma.As of 4 February 2023, a total of 4386 cholera cases (1009 laboratory-confirmed; 23%) with 16 deaths (CFR 0.4%) have been reported, of which 4011 (91.5%) are from Nyiragongo and 375 (8.5%) from Karisimbi. In the HZ of Nyiragongo, the most affected age group is 5-14 years (30.1%), followed by 1-4 years (29.7%) and 15 -29 years (16.6%); children under the age of one represent 8% of cases.In total, 15 health areas including seven in the Nyiragongo HZ (Kanyaruchinya, Kibati, Kiziba, Mudja, Munigi, Ngangi III and Turunga) and eight in Karisimbi HZ (Baraka, Bujovu, Kasika, Katoyi, Majengo, Methodiste Mugunga and Muugano Solidarite) are currently affected by the cholera epidemic.In the HZ of Nyiragongo, the health area of Kanyaruchinya is the most affected, contributing to 73.3% of all suspected cholera cases reported from Nyiragongo. In Karisimbi HZ, the Methodist health area is the most affected with 59.4% of all cases, followed by Baraka and Lasika health areas (both contributing to 7.3% of cases from Karisimbi HZ).Figure 2. Cumulative number of cholera cases (suspected and confirmed) by health area in Niyragongo and Karisimbi health zones, as of 4 February 2023. Source: Nord Kivu Provincial Health Division.The cholera outbreak is principally affecting internally displaced populations (IDPs), with 97% of the cases reported among IDPs in the HZ of Nyiragongo, and 59% of cases among IDPs reported from the Methodist health area of Karisimbi HZ, which houses the Don Bosco IDP camp.However, the outbreak is also spreading across the surrounding communities with nearly 3% of the cases in the HZ of Nyiragongo and 41% of the cases in the HZ of Karisimbi belonging to the host community.Epidemiology of choleraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.Coordination: multisectoral coordination has been established at the provincial level, and daily coordination meetings are held in Kaniyaruchinya (Nyiragongo HZ). The incident management system (IMS) was activated at the WHO office. A budgeted preparedness and response plan has been developed and several partners are involved in the response, including WHO, which supports the Provincial Health Division (PHD) in the implementation of the health sector response in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and the other partners, such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), International Organization for Migration (IOM), Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), UNICEF, World Food Programme (WFP), and Save the Children.Epidemiological surveillance and laboratory: a surveillance and laboratory commission has been set up by the North Kivu Provincial Health Division with the support of WHO and other partners. Four data managers have been trained and equipped with computers by WHO. Training on case definition has been provided to healthcare workers and community health workers (CHW); investigation teams have also been trained on active case finding. Surveillance activities are ongoing, including active case finding, alert notification and investigation, and contact tracing and follow-up. Data is collected daily from Oral Rehydration Points (ORP), Cholera Treatment Units (CTU) and Cholera Treatment Centers (CTC). Samples are regularly collected also from suspected cases registered outside the outbreak area in order to assess the extent of the epidemic. Data is analyzed on a daily basis and shared with partners for operational decision-making. WHO also supported the National Biological Research Institute in Goma with sample transportation.Case management: WHO and partners supported the establishment of 56 ORPs in IDP sites, four CTUs (Kibati, Kanyarucinya, Kahembe, and Don Bosco) and two CTCs (Munigi, Kiziba) in the most affected health areas, with a total capacity of 205 beds. WHO and partners also provided support for the free provision of basic health care in functional health structures in the two affected health zones to ensure the maintenance of essential health services for vulnerable populations.Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)/Water, Hygiene and Sanitation (WASH): an IPC/WASH commission has been set up by the North Kivu PHD and supported by partners including WHO and UNICEF. Systematic decontamination of households and public spaces is implemented by trained teams. Training for safe and dignified burials is also carried out. In IDP sites a total of 1706 latrines, 293 showers, 91 hand-washing stations and 62 well sites have been established. Regular supply of water is made through cisterns. Training for healthcare workers and hygiene workers on IPC practices is also carried out regularly.Risk communication and community engagement: Several advocacy meetings were held with community leaders and political-administrative authorities. Community workers have been trained to raise awareness about cholera, and preventive measures are communicated door-to-door and during public meetings with the affected population.Vaccination: At the national level, coordination meetings were organized to ensure the preparation of the vaccination campaign against cholera in the two affected health zones. WHO provided support to the Ministry of Health for the mobilization from the vaccination International Coordination Group (ICG) of 364 137 doses of oral cholera vaccines in the two affected HZs. With the support of The Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI), after its launch by the Governor of North Kivu province on January 25, 2023, the Oral Cholera Vaccination (OCV) campaign in three HZs of North Kivu PHD (including in IDP sites) took place between 25-30 January 2023 and immunized 351 207 people aged one year and older out of a target of 364 137, i.e. partial coverage of 96.4%.Cholera is endemic in parts of DRC. In 2022, according to data from the National Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response System, a total of 18 403 suspected cases of cholera, including 302 deaths (CFR 1.6%), were notified in the DRC, in 104 HZs of 19 of the 26 provinces of the country.However, the current epidemic is showing a rapid upsurge in a fragile context such as IDPs camps.For years, DRC has been experiencing several armed and community conflicts, particularly in the east, putting the country in a state of unprecedented humanitarian and health crisis.Due to internal armed clashes, which intensified in 2022, nearly 450 857 new IDPs arrived in North Kivu (which already hosts 1.9 million of IDPs). Of them, 53.4% (240 579) are hosted in the territory of Nyiragongo and particularly 97.7% (235 111) in IDPs sites, which are characterized by overcrowding, poor hygiene and sanitation conditions, very limited access to drinking water, latrines and basic health services. In addition, population movements are regularly observed between the affected HZs and the other HZs in the province of North Kivu as well as the rest of the country, where the populations also have limited access to drinking water, good hygiene and sanitation conditions, as well as to health care facilities.Moreover, the current rainy season may favor the spread of the epidemic in other HZs.With the ongoing armed conflicts, displacements are likely to continue, leading to a worsening of the humanitarian context and the vulnerabilities of the populations, including the need for basic social services. All this is evolving in a context of a fragile health system; recurrent attacks on hospital infrastructures and reduced availability of services. Other outbreaks are also ongoing (COVID-19, yellow fever, poliomyelitis, measles, mpox (monkeypox), meningitis, etc.) and there are extremely limited human, material and financial resources.The risk of cholera spreading to neighboring countries cannot be ruled out. Indeed, there are population movements between the affected health zones and neighboring countries, including Rwanda and Uganda.The affected HZs border the city of Goma, which has an international airport. Countries in the Great Lakes sub-region (Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi), which are most at risk of cholera importation from the current epidemic hotspots in North Kivu, have inadequate levels of access to health care, poor drinking water, hygienic and sanitary conditions. A cholera epidemic is also ongoing in Burundi with 120 suspected cases and 1 death reported as of 7 February 2023. This epidemic affects the city of Bujumbura, which is located on the shores of Lake Tanganyika on the border with South Kivu, with population movements across the border.The outbreak is occurring against a backdrop of a surge in cholera outbreaks globally, which has constrained the availability of vaccines, tests, and treatments.Considering the above-described scenario, WHO assesses the risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national and regional level, and low at the global level.A multi-pronged approach is essential to combat cholera and reduce mortality. The measures used combine surveillance, improvement of water supply, sanitation and hygiene, social mobilization, treatment of the disease and oral cholera vaccines. Countries affected by cholera are advised to strengthen disease surveillance and national preparedness to rapidly detect and respond to possible outbreaks.WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Effective risk communication and community engagement strategies are needed to encourage behavioral change and the adoption of appropriate preventive measures.Measures aimed at improving environmental conditions include applying long-term sustainable solutions for water supply, sanitation and hygiene in cholera-prone areas. In addition to cholera, these interventions can also prevent a wide range of other water-borne diseases and contribute to achieving goals in education and the fight against poverty and malnutrition. Solutions for water supply, sanitation and hygiene related to cholera are in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.Rapid access to treatment is essential during a cholera outbreak. Oral rehydration should be available in communities and not just in larger health centers that can offer intravenous infusions and management at any time. With rapid and appropriate care, the case fatality rate should remain below 1%.Community mobilization must continue as an integral part of the response and should cover information on the symptoms of cholera, on the precautions to take to protect against the disease, and the need to promptly seek care when symptoms appear.The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of patients to less than 1%.WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions to the Democratic Republic of Congo based on the currently available information.Citable reference: World Health Organization (10 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera  - Democratic Republic of Congo. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON441Situation at a glanceMalawi is experiencing a widespread cholera outbreak, with 36 943 cases and 1210 associated deaths reported from all 29 districts since 3 March 2022. This is the deadliest outbreak of cholera in the country’s history.Cholera has been endemic in Malawi since 1998 with seasonal outbreaks reported during the rainy season (November through May). However, the current outbreak has extended through the dry season, with cases being reported since March 2022.In light of the ongoing rainy season, wide geographical spread, and a consistently high case fatality rate (CFR) of above 3%, the ongoing cholera outbreak was declared a public health emergency by the Malawi government on 5 December 2022.  Currently, the large geographic spread and the high number of reported cases in the country are stretching all capacity to respond to the outbreak, increasing the risk of serious public health impact. The outbreak in Malawi is occurring against a backdrop of a surge in cholera outbreaks globally, which has constrained the availability of vaccines, tests, and treatments.With a sharp increase of cases seen over the last month, fears are that the outbreak will continue to worsen without strong interventions.Description of the casesOn 3 March 2022, the Ministry of Public Health of Malawi notified WHO of a cholera outbreak after laboratory confirmation of a cholera case in Machinga district hospital on 2 March 2022.Between 3 March 2022 through 3 February 2023, a total of 36 943 cases, including 1210 deaths, have been reported from all 29 districts in Malawi (overall case fatality rate (CFR) 3.3%) with active transmission ongoing in 27 of 29 districts. There was a 143% increase in the number of cases in January (17 078) compared to December (7017 cases). As of 3 February, Mangochi district bordering Lake Malawi is the most affected area, reporting 6974 cases and 114 deaths (CFR 1.6%).The current outbreak started in March 2022 from Machinga district following tropical storm Ana (January 2022) and Cyclone Gombe (March 2022) which caused floods leading to the displacement of a population with low pre-existing immunity and had lack of access to safe water, sanitation, and hygiene. The outbreak was mainly limited to the flood-affected areas in the southern region until August 2022 when it spread to the northern and central parts of the country. Since December 2022 cases have spread back towards the south of the country with all regions affected including Blantyre and Lilongwe, the two main cities of the country.Since the beginning of the outbreak, and as of 3 February 2023, the age group 21 to 30 years is the most affected (27.7% of cases) followed by the 11 to 20 age group (22.8%). Of all the cases,17 943 are males representing 57% of the caseload. Most deaths have been reported among those aged 60 years and above as of 29 January 2023. Most deaths have occurred among males (66%).From 1998 to date, cholera cases have been reported in the country, especially in the southern region, which is low-lying, flat, and prone to flooding during the rainy season. The highest numbers of cases and deaths were reported in 1998/99 (25 000 cases, 860 deaths, CFR 3.4%), 2001/02 (33 546 cases, 968 deaths, case fatality rate 2.3%), and 2008/09 (5751 cases, 125 deaths, CFR 2.2%).Figure 1: Number of suspected and confirmed cholera cases (n=36 943) and deaths (n=1210) per day in Malawi, 3 March 2022 to 3 February 2023.Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and PopulationFigure 2: Geographical distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=36 943) and deaths (n=1210) by District in Malawi, 3 March 2022 to 3 February 2023.Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and PopulationFigure 3. Age-sex distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=36 943) in Malawi, 3 March 2022 to 3 February 2023.Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and PopulationEpidemiology of CholeraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to safe drinking water. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and in its’ severe form can be fatal within hours if untreated.The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Most people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop severe forms of the disease with acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting leading to severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS) and successful rehydration therapy can keep the CFR below 1%.The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.A multi-sectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.Emergency response activities are being conducted by the Ministry of Health, WHO and other partners since the declaration of the outbreak in March 2022.Coordination and response:Surveillance:Health System Strengthening/Case Management:Capacity Building/IPC:Human Resource:Laboratory:Logistics and Supplies:Reactive Vaccination Campaigns:Two oral cholera vaccine (OCV) vaccination campaigns have been conducted across 21 districts since the onset of the outbreak.Risk Communication and Community Engagement:WASH Interventions:Cholera is endemic in Malawi with seasonal outbreaks occurring during the wet season. The first major outbreak occurred in 1998 and was widespread in the Southern Region, with 25 000 cases reported. Prior to the current outbreak, the largest outbreak in Malawi occured from October 2001 to April 2002, and affected 26 of the 29 districts, with 33 546 cases and 968 deaths (CFR 3%). Following floods in the southern region in January 2022, the Ministry of Health confirmed a cholera outbreak on 3 March 2022. This outbreak, which was initially limited to the Southern Region and the flood-affected areas, has now spread to all the regions and districts in the country. Transmission has continued during the dry season (June to October), which is traditionally a low transmission period for Malawi. With the onset of the rainy season from November through May, the number and spread of cholera cases is expected to increase further. Therefore, the risk is considered to be very high at the national level. The poor WASH capacities in the affected districts, especially in the fishing communities along Lake Malawi, pose risk for the continuous propagation of the cholera outbreak nationally, to neighbouring countries and in the region.Two reactive single-dose OCV campaigns have been carried out in parts of 21 affected districts, however unvaccinated sub-districts and districts still remain at risk. Other identified challenges from the most at-risk districts include inadequate capacity for case management and diagnosis in the affected areas resulting in delayed case detection and poor outcomes. This is further exacerbated due to delayed care-seeking behaviour of the community.There is a continued risk for further increase in the number of cases and international spread. Confirmed cases have been reported across the border in Mozambique and the risk for cross-border transmission between Malawi and Mozambique remains high during the current outbreak.The country has experience in controlling cholera outbreaks. However, due to concurrent outbreaks (polio, COVID-19), the large geographic spread of the outbreak (with cases reported in all districts) and the high case numbers, the current burden is overstraining existing national response capacity and resources as well as the capacity of partners’ support. In addition, there are multiple ongoing large cholera outbreaks worldwide. This is stretching limited global stocks of cholera supplies and OCV, which limits available resources for Malawi and the region.WHO assesses the risk of this outbreak to be very high at national and regional level. On 21 January 2023, WHO assessed the risk of the global cholera outbreak as very high due to ongoing multiple cholera outbreaks in many WHO regions. There is an urgent need to improve access to safe water sanitation and hygiene. WHO recommends improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases as well as improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities. Promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health communication messages are a key element for a successful response. OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.One of the factors contributing to the high CFR in Mangochi, Blantyre, Machinga, Lilongwe was late presentation to a health facility. Delay in health-seeking behaviour, and limited community sensitization can lead to treatment delays and increased deaths, as well as an underestimation of the scale of the outbreak (cases and related deaths). WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of hospitalized patients to less than 1%. Inter-district and cross-border coordination and collaboration, risk communication, and community engagement are crucial in the prevention and containment of this cholera outbreak.  WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Malawi based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak is taking place in border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Malawi and its neighbouring countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing so that any spread across the border is quickly contained.Citable reference: World Health Organization (9 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera - Malawi. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON435Situation at glance:On 5 January 2023, Oman IHR-NFP notified WHO of a case of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), in a 60-year-old male, from North Batinah Governorate in Oman. The case had no history of physical contact with dromedaries, goats, sheep or contact with camel products, milk, or urine. Based on the investigation conducted to identify potential exposure sources within the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms, camel racing exercises were found to have been conducted in the area of the patient’s residence in North Batinah Governorate. A total of 76 close contacts were followed for 14 days from the date of last exposure with the case. No secondary cases have been reported to date.Description of the case:On 5 January 2023, the National IHR Focal point of Oman notified WHO of one case of MERS-CoV from North Batinah Governorate in Oman.The case, a 60-year-old male, non-healthcare worker, with comorbidities, who is a resident of North Batinah Governorate, developed symptoms including chest discomfort, shortness of breath, and fever on 28 December which lasted for six days. On 2 January, he was taken to the emergency department of a secondary hospital where he was admitted to the Cardiology Unit for non-invasive ventilation. Prior to admission at the hospital, the case sought medical attention in two healthcare facilities for his symptoms. The case subsequently showed clinical and radiological improvement and was discharged on 16 January 2023.Screening for Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) was initiated on 3 January 2023 and MERS-CoV was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing. Investigation of the history of exposure to the known risk factors in the 14 days prior to the onset of the symptoms identified camel racing exercises conducted in the same area as the patient’s residence in North Batinah Governorate. The case, a driving instructor by occupation, had no history of physical contact with dromedaries, goats, sheep or contact with camel products, milk, or urine.The last MERS-CoV infection was reported from Oman in May 2022. The first ever laboratory-confirmed case of MERS-CoV in Oman was reported in June 2013. Since then, including this current case, Oman has reported 26 cases of MERS-CoV including seven deaths (CFR 27%).Epidemiology of the disease:Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection that is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the MERS-CoV infection.MERS-CoV infections range from asymptomatic or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS-CoV disease is fever, cough and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems and those with chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit and can result in high mortality.No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and treatments are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition.Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Since 2012, globally the case fatality rate (CFR) for MERS-CoV cases is approximately 36%, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS may be missed by existing surveillance systems and until more is known about the disease, the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries who are a host and zoonotic source of MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to be transmitted between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings. Outside of the healthcare setting there has been limited human-to human transmission.Cases of MERS-CoV infection are rare in Oman.  Since June 2013, a total of 26 MERS-CoV cases and seven deaths, including this current case, have been reported to WHO from Oman.The total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2603 including 935 associated deaths (CFR 36%) as of December 2022. The majority of the reported cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. Outside of this region, there has been one large outbreak in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in Republic of Korea and one in China) and 38 deaths (CFR 21%) were reported. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date.The notification of this case does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of raw camel milk), or in a healthcare setting.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information.Surveillance: Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control in healthcare settings: Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people, particularly in healthcare facilities.Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings: IPC strategies to prevent or limit transmission in healthcare settings include the following:Infection prevention and control in the community: General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid consuming raw camel products like milk or urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, events (e.g., camel races, or camel beauty pageants), markets, or barn areas where dromedaries are present.Case management: Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care settings and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.Timely, effective, and safe supportive management of patients with MERS should be provided, particularly for those at risk of more severe disease.International travel and trade: WHO does not advise specific MERS-CoV screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.    Citable reference: World Health Organization (8 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus in Oman. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON436 Situation at a glanceFrom 1 November 2022 to 27 January 2023, a total of 559 cases of meningitis (of which 111 are laboratory confirmed), including 18 deaths (overall CFR 3.2%), have been reported from Zinder Region, southeast of Niger, compared to the 231 cases reported during 1 November 2021 to 31 January 2022. The majority of laboratory-confirmed cases (104/111; 93.7%) are due to Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C (NmC). Reactive vaccination campaigns with the trivalent ACW meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine have been implemented.Niger is located largely in the African meningitis belt with seasonal outbreaks recurring every year. However, the ongoing outbreak shows both an increased number of cases and an increased growth rate compared to the previous seasons.Zinder region shares an international border with Jigawa State in Nigeria where a NmC outbreak is also ongoing, confirming the risk of international spread. Moreover, the simultaneous occurrence of other epidemics, insecurity and population displacement, all in the context of a protracted humanitarian crisis, are likely to contribute to the spread of the outbreak in other countries of the West African subregion.WHO assesses the risk posed by the current meningitis outbreak in Niger as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Description of the situationBeing located in the African meningitis belt, Niger has been affected by several meningitis epidemics resulting in 20 789 cases and 1369 deaths (CFR 6.6%) reported since 2015.From 1 November 2022 to 27 January 2023, a total of 559 cases of meningitis (of which 111 are laboratory confirmed), including 18 deaths (overall CFR 3.2%) have been reported from Zinder region, southeast of Niger, compared to the 231 cases reported during 1 November 2021 to 31 January 2022.The last meningitis outbreak in the Zinder region, occurred in the 2021/2022 season, with a total of 372 cases, including 12 deaths (CFR 3%).Figure 1. Epicurve of cases of meningitis reported in Niger by month, 1 October 2021 - 27 January 2023.Of the 228 samples collected from suspected cases, 154 (67.5%) have been analyzed by Niamey's Center for Medical and Health Research (CERMES). Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C was identified in the majority of confirmed cases (n=104; 93.7%), followed by Streptococcus pneumoniae (n=5; 4.5%) and Haemophilus influenzae (n=2; 1.8%). The remaining 43 samples tested negative.Males represent 53% of all cases. Among the total of 559 cases of meningitis, people under 20 years of age are the most affected by the outbreak (n=538; 96.3%), with 202 cases (36.2%) reported in the 10-14 years age group, followed by the 5-9 years age group with 153 cases (27.4%), the 15-19 years age group with 107 cases (19.1%), and the 0-4 years age group with 76 cases (13.6%).The most affected health district of Zinder region is Dungass (342 cases, 6 deaths), followed by Matamèye (98 cases, 3 deaths), Mirriah (72 cases, 3 deaths), Magaria (38 cases, 5 deaths), Zinder ville (7 cases, 1 death) and Gouré (2 cases, 0 deaths).Figure 2. Distribution of reported meningitis cases by health district, Zinder region, Niger, 1 November 2022 – 27 January 2023.Epidemiology of meningitisMeningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. Several different bacteria can cause meningitis, however, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis (N. meningitis) are the most frequent ones, and are transmitted from person to person through droplets of respiratory or throat secretions from infected people.A total of 12 serogroups of N. meningitidis have been identified, six of which (A, B, C, W, X and Y) can cause meningococcal meningitis epidemics.The average incubation period is 4 days but can range between 2 and 10 days. The most common symptoms of meningitis are a stiff neck, high fever, sensitivity to light, confusion, headaches and vomiting. Even with early diagnosis and adequate treatment, 5% to 10% of patients die, typically within 24 to 48 hours after the onset of symptoms. Bacterial meningitis may result in brain damage, hearing loss or a learning disability in 10% to 20% of survivors. A less common, but even more severe (and often fatal), form of meningococcal disease is meningococcal septicaemia, which is characterized by a haemorrhagic rash and rapid circulatory collapse.The highest burden of disease is seen in a region of sub-Saharan Africa, known as the African Meningitis Belt, which is especially recognised to be at high risk of meningococcal but also pneumococcal meningitis epidemics.Niger is located largely in the African meningitis belt, where meningitis epidemics typically follow a seasonal pattern (usually from January to June), with a size that varies from year to year. In 2015, a large meningitis outbreak attributed to NmC occurred, affecting nearly 10 000 people. In 2009 and 2006, meningitis outbreaks caused by N. meningitidis serogroups A (NmA) and X (NmX), respectively, were also reported. Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae are two other important pathogens that contribute significantly to the bacterial meningitis burden within Niger.Licensed vaccines against meningococcal, pneumococcal and haemophilus influenzae diseases have been available for many years. These bacteria have several different strains (known as serotypes or serogroups) and vaccines are designed to protect against the most harmful strains. Over time, there have been major improvements in strain coverage and vaccine availability, but no universal vaccine against these infections exists.In the African meningitis belt, meningococcus serogroup A accounted for 80–85% of meningitis epidemics before the introduction of a meningococcal A conjugate vaccine through mass preventive campaigns (since 2010) and into routine immunization programmes (since 2016). Among vaccinated populations, incidence of serogroup A meningitis has declined by more than 99%, and no serogroup A case has been confirmed since 2017.However, cases of meningitis and outbreaks due to other meningococcal serogroups, apart from serogroup B, continue to strike.The ongoing outbreak shows both an increased number of cases and an increased growth rate compared to the previous seasons.Moreover, the meningitis epidemic season (usually from January to June, marked by high temperatures and dry winds combined with heavy dust, a period known as the harmattan), the mixing of populations, the simultaneous occurrence of other epidemics in the same region (measles, diphtheria and COVID-19), insecurity and population displacement, all in the context of a protracted humanitarian crisis, are likely to contribute to the spread of the outbreak.The Zinder region borders Jigawa State in Nigeria, where a NmC outbreak is also ongoing, confirming the risk of international spread to other countries of the West African subregion.WHO assesses the risk posed by the current meningitis outbreak in Niger as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Meningococcal meningitis remains a public health concern with a high case fatality rate and leading to serious long-term complications.Preventing meningitis through vaccination is the most effective way to reduce the burden and impact of the disease by delivering long-lasting protection. The rollout of multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines is a public health priority to eliminate bacterial meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt. Introduction into routine immunization programmes and maintaining high coverage will be critical to avoid the resurgence of epidemics.Antibiotics for close contacts of meningococcal cases, when given promptly, decrease the risk of transmission. Outside the African meningitis belt, chemoprophylaxis is recommended for close contacts within the household. Within the meningitis belt, chemoprophylaxis for close contacts is recommended in non-epidemic situations. Ciprofloxacin is the antibiotic of choice, and ceftriaxone an alternative.Admission to a hospital or health centre is necessary. Isolation of the patient is not usually advised after 24 hours of treatment.Appropriate antibiotic treatment must be started as soon as possible. Ideally, lumbar puncture should be done first as antibiotics can make it more difficult to grow bacteria from the spinal fluid. However, blood sampling can also help to identify the cause and the priority is to start treatment without delay. A range of antibiotics is used to treat meningitis, including penicillin, ampicillin, and ceftriaxone. During epidemics of meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis, ceftriaxone is the drug of choice.The response to epidemics consists of appropriate case management, active community-based case-finding and reactive mass vaccination of affected populations. Surveillance, from case detection to investigation and laboratory confirmation is essential to the control of meningitis.Reactive vaccination campaigns have been implemented in Zinder region, and monitoring the spread to new areas is crucial to guide further response activities, including considering further vaccine requests if appropriate. Timeliness of the reactive campaign is critical, ideally within four weeks of crossing the epidemic threshold.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Niger on the basis of the information available on the current event. Citable reference: World Health Organization (8 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Meningitis - Niger. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON439 Situation at a glanceOn 23 January 2023, the Paraguay IHR National Focal Point notified WHO of a measles case in a 14-month-old boy from Itapúa Department, who had onset of fever and rash on 15 September 2022. The case was notified as a highly suspected case of measles in September 2022, and on 11 October 2022, the case was laboratory confirmed by the Central Public Health Laboratory  (LCSP. as per its acronym in Spanish) in Paraguay. Although the case had no history of receiving routine vaccination as per the immunization schedule,  one dose of MMR (MMR1) was given on 12 September 2022 as part of measles vaccination campaign conducted in the affected department between November 2021 to 16 December 2022 . Due to the history of recent vaccination, the case samples were sent to United States Center for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) for further molecular analysis, which tested positive for measles and negative for measles vaccine strain on 10 January 2023.  The case had no history of travel, however, 30 days prior to developing symptoms, he came into contact with a symptomatic family member, diagnosed as having an allergic reaction at the time, and who was a contact of a family member with a history of periodic travel to Buenos Aires, Argentina.  Control measures, such as strengthening surveillance activities, were implemented by the local and national authorities as soon as the case was notified in September 2022.This is the first case of measles reported in Paraguay since 1998.Description of the situationOn 23 January 2023, the Paraguay IHR National Focal Point notified WHO of a confirmed case of measles in Itapúa Department, Paraguay. Itapúa is close to the southern border of the country with Argentina. The case is a 14-month-old boy who had onset of rash and fever on 15 September 2022. He had no travel history and had received one dose of MMR vaccine (MMR1) on 12 September 2022. According to the information received,  30 days prior to onset of symptoms,  the case was in contact with a 16-month-old child, a symptomatic family contact, diagnosed as having an allergic reaction including fever, rhinorrhea and skin lesions. This symptomatic family contact was a contact of a family member with a history of periodic travel to Buenos Aires, Argentina. On 26 September 2022, a serum sample was collected and sent to LCSP which was reactive for measles by Immunoglobulin M ( IgM). On 11 October, a second serum sample was collected and sent to the LCSP and tested reactive for measles by IgM and IgG. Further, on 16 November, serum and urine samples were sent to the US CDC for confirmation, and additional molecular analysis was performed which tested positive for measles by reverse transcriptase – quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) on 10 January 2023, and negative for measles vaccine strain.In Paraguay, the official measles vaccination coverage for the first and second dose of measles, mumps and rubella vaccine (MMR) in 2021 was reported to be  56% and 55%, respectively, lower than the WHO recommended sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95%.  The last National MMR Vaccination Campaign was conducted from November 2021 to 16 December 2022 including the department of Itapúa.This is the first case of measles reported in Paraguay since 1998.Epidemiology of measles:Measles is a highly contagious viral disease, which affects susceptible individuals of all ages and remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally. The mode of transmission is airborne or via droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat of infected persons. Initial symptoms, which usually appear 10-12 days after infection, include high fever, usually accompanied by one or several of the following symptoms: runny nose, bloodshot eyes, cough, and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. Several days later, a rash develops, usually starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreading downwards. A patient is infectious four days before the start of the rash to four days after the appearance of the rash. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.Among malnourished children and immunocompromised people including people with HIV, cancer and treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, and pneumonia.Measles can be prevented by immunization. In countries with low administrative vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.The following public health measures were implemented by local and national health authorities: In 2016, the WHO Region of the Americas was the first Region of the World Health Organization (WHO) to be declared free of the endemic transmission of measles virus by the International Expert Committee (IEC) for documenting and verifying measles, rubella and the congenital rubella syndrome in the Americas. However, keeping the Region free of measles is an ongoing challenge due to the permanent risk of importation and reintroduction of the virus.In 2021, five countries and territories (countries hereafter) have achieved ≥95% coverage for the first dose of MMR (MMR1) in the Region of the Americas, while 13 countries had MMR1 coverage of less than 80%. For MMR2, only two countries had ≥95% coverage and 36 countries had less than 80% coverage.Several factors have contributed to the outbreaks of measles in the Region of the Americas occurring between 2017 and 2022, including lack of compliance with 2-dose measles vaccination coverage, influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the same period, there are gaps in the performance of international indicators for integrated measles/rubella surveillance.In Paraguay, risk of disruption to routine immunization activities remains due to both the COVID-19 related burden on the health system and decreased demand for measles vaccination because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services, even for brief periods, can result in an increased number of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs) such as measles. WHO recommends strengthening efforts to implement the Plan of Action for the Sustainability of Measles, Rubella, and Congenital Rubella Syndrome Elimination in the Americas 2018-2023, with a focus on: 1) guaranteeing universal access to measles vaccination services; 2) strengthening the capacity of epidemiological surveillance systems for measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome; 3) developing national operational capacity to maintain the elimination status; 4) establishing standard mechanisms for rapid response to imported measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome cases, in order to prevent the re-establishment of endemic transmission in the Region’s countries.To avoid the spread of measles beyond this case, WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV in all municipalities and strengthened surveillance to achieve timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities.WHO recommends strengthened surveillance particularly in high-traffic border areas to rapidly detect and respond to highly suspected measles cases.WHO also recommends managing imported measles cases to avoid the re-establishment of endemic transmission through the activation of rapid response teams trained for this purpose, and by implementing national rapid response protocols when there are imported cases. Once a rapid response team has been activated, continued coordination between the national, sub-national and local levels must be ensured, with permanent and fluid communication channels between all levels. During outbreaks, it is recommended to establish adequate hospital case management in order to avoid nosocomial transmission, with appropriate referral of patients to isolation rooms (for any level of care) and avoiding contact with other patients in waiting rooms and/or other hospital rooms.WHO recommends vaccination of at-risk populations (without proof of vaccination or immunity against measles and rubella), such as healthcare workers, persons working in tourism and transportation (hotels, airports, border crossings, mass transportation, and others), as well as international travelers. Implementing a plan to immunize migrant populations in high-traffic border areas, prioritizing those considered at-risk, including both migrants and residents, to increase vaccination coverage in order to increase population immunity.WHO recommends maintaining a stock of the measles-rubella (MR) and/or MMR vaccine, and syringes/supplies for control actions of imported cases. Access to vaccination services should be facilitated, according to the national scheme, to foreigners; people from the same country who perform temporary activities in countries with ongoing outbreaks; displaced populations; indigenous populations, or other vulnerable populations.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Paraguay, based on the information available on the current outbreak.Citable reference: Citable reference: World Health Organization ( 2 February 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Measles -  Paraguay. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON438  Situation at a glancePublic health measures from both human and animal health agencies have been implemented. These include:This is the first reported case of human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5) virus in Ecuador and in Latin America and the Caribbean. This human case was exposed to poultry, which died without apparent cause. Outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza have been detected recently in the provinces of Cotopaxi (influenza A(H5N1)) and Bolívar, Ecuador.Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Therefore, human cases are expected, although rare.According to the information received thus far, the virus has not been detected in other individuals beyond this single case. While further characterization of the virus from this case is pending, currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that influenza A(H5) viruses have not acquired the ability for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low. The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.A global risk assessment associated with recent influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses was published on 21 December 2022. However, the subtype and clade information for this human case is not yet known.There are no approved vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5) in humans. Candidate vaccines to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses (human and poultry) and serological investigations are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.Citable reference: World Health Organization (18 January 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5) -  Ecuador. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON434   Situation at a glanceOn 11 January 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Uganda declared the end of the Ebola disease outbreak caused by the Sudan ebolavirus that affected nine districts. A total of 164 cases (142 confirmed, 22 probable) with 77 deaths (55 among confirmed cases and 22 among probable cases) were reported during the outbreak.In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Sudan ebolavirus infections) after the sample from the last admitted case that was collected on 29 November 2022 tested negative before discharge, and the last confirmed death was accorded a safe and dignified burial on 29 November 2022.Although the outbreak has been declared over, health authorities are maintaining surveillance to rapidly identify and respond to any re-emergence. A follow-up programme has been put in place to support survivors. Neighbouring countries remain on alert and are encouraged to continue strengthening their capacities to detect and respond to infectious disease outbreaks.Description of the situationOn 11 January 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Uganda declared the end of the Ebola disease outbreak caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) that affected nine out of 146 districts: Bunyangabu, Jinja, Kagadi, Kampala, Kassanda, Kyegegwa, Masaka, Mubende, and Wakiso. This declaration follows a 42-day period after the last confirmed case tested negative on 29 November 2022 and was released from care on 30 November, and the last confirmed death was accorded a safe and dignified burial on 29 November 2022.  Uganda declared an outbreak of Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus on 20 September 2022, after a case at Mubende Regional Referral Hospital (MRRH) in Mubende district was confirmed by the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI). In total,164 cases (142 confirmed, 22 probable) with 77 deaths (55 among confirmed cases and 22 among probable cases) and 87 recovered patients, were reported.A higher proportion of cases occurred among males (59%), while the most affected age group was represented by those aged 20-29 years (31%), followed by those aged 30-39 years (30%). A quarter of cases were reported among children under 10 years old. Overall, 19 confirmed cases with seven deaths occurred among healthcare workers (HCWs).Mubende was the epicentre of the outbreak, accounting for 45% of confirmed cases (64 confirmed and 19 probable), followed by Kassanda with 35% of confirmed cases (49 confirmed and 2 probable), Kampala with 13% of confirmed cases (17 confirmed and 1 probable), Wakiso with 3% of confirmed cases (4 confirmed cases), Kyegegwa with 2% of confirmed cases (3 confirmed cases), Jinja with 1% of confirmed cases (2 confirmed cases), and Bunyangabo, Kagadi and Masaka, which reported one confirmed case each (Table 1).Table 1. Number of cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 10 January 2023.From 20 September to 10 January 2023, a total of 4793 contacts were listed and 11 025 alerts were reported, of which 8088 (73%) were investigated and 7382 (67%) were validated as suspected cases of Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus. During this period, 1087 safe and dignified burials (SDB) were undertaken (all suspected deaths had to be tested and accorded a SDB), and 6681 samples were tested for Sudan ebolavirus. A total of 314 603 travelers were screened at international points of entry and four suspected cases of SUDV were detected, who all tested negative.Coordination: Uganda MoH, together with WHO and other partners, initiated response measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread. The MoH activated the national and district emergency management committees to coordinate the response.Surveillance: WHO supported the MoH in the implementation of enhanced surveillance activities. Multidisciplinary teams were deployed to the field to actively search for cases, identify, list, and follow-up contacts for 21 days.Partner support: Following a Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Request for Assistance, a total of 69 offers of support were received from 23 partner institutions. Eleven experts were deployed to the field and three are still supporting the response in the functions of case management, infection prevention and control (IPC), and Go.Data implementation (Go.Data is the initiative of a group of public health partners and is managed by the GOARN with the aim to provide an outbreak investigation tool for field data collection during public health emergencies).Over USD 27 million was mobilized from Development Partners in cash and in-kind contributions including from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), UK Aid, Norwegian Government, Novo Nordisk Foundation, The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), Irish Aid, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), The Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (DG ECHO), Sweden, Luxemburg, the Republic of Korea and donors contributing to the WHO Contingency Emergency Funds (CFE).Vaccination trial: WHO convened an expert meeting to prioritize candidate vaccines. In coordination with Ugandan researchers, health authorities, and regulators, a ring vaccination trial protocol was developed and locally approved. Three candidate vaccines were identified and over 5000 doses of these arrived in the country with the first batch on 8 December and the last two on 17 December.Survivor Care Programme: Out of the 142 confirmed cases, 87 survivors were registered. An Ebola Survivors program (ESP) has been established following WHO guidance on clinical care for survivors of Ebola virus disease, with the goal to improve the wellbeing of survivors by integrating survivor health care into the National MoH System. WHO led the ESP planning, supported the needs assessments, and the establishment of three clinics, located in geographical areas where survivors are residing. Two of the three clinics are already operational. All survivors have had at least one clinical evaluation and have received at least one psychosocial support session with the clinic and community teams respectively.Laboratory and clinical case management: WHO, GOARN, and partners supported the MoH in the establishment of screening, triage, isolation and care areas at designated reference hospitals in affected districts to identify suspected patients; and also supported the establishment of Ebola treatment centres in affected districts, and Ebola testing mobile laboratories. Treatment centres have been equipped with essential medicines and supplies to deliver safe, optimized supportive care, including personal protective equipment (PPE), monitoring devices, point-of-care laboratory testing, intravenous fluids, and supportive oxygen devices. WHO and GOARN deployed clinical experts and organized bio-secured, patient flow circuits that allowed close monitoring of cases. Over time, isolation areas and treatment centres were able to manage both suspected and confirmed patients according to WHO guidelines and standards. For confirmed patients, access to investigational products was provided within the locally approved expanded access protocols under the MEURI ethical framework while the Randomized Clinical Trial (RTC) protocol was under development.Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) activities: WHO supported RCCE activities and awareness campaigns implemented by the MoH, as messages run by local radio stations, social media messages, door to door sensitisation of communities. A festive season RCCE plan was also developed to orient RCCE activities in Uganda and prevention in neighboring countries.Preparedness in neighboring countries: Ministries of Health, WHO, in-country and international partners, supported Sudan Virus Disease (SVD) preparedness and operational readiness activities in neighboring countries that were identified as at-risk through risk assessments (Burundi, Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Rwanda, and Tanzania).Over 2000 health workers were trained during the outbreak on IPC, psychosocial support and care for both patients and affected families, and enhanced clinical care for SVD patients.The outbreak is declared over, with no new cases reported for 42 consecutive days.This outbreak is not unexpected given that SVD is enzootic, present in animal reservoirs in the region.  Uganda reported four SVD outbreaks in 2000, 2011, and two in 2012 prior to this last one in 2022, in addition to two Ebola outbreaks caused by the Zaire ebolavirus in 2007 and 2018. It is therefore likely that the filoviruses are present in the wild animal reservoir in the region. Thus, the risk of re-emergence of any filoviruses through exposure to an animal host or from a persistent virus cannot be excluded.This outbreak showed that re-emergence of SVD is a major public health concern in Uganda.  Strengthening of surveillance capacities can help to detect future outbreaks preventing further spread.Ebola is a severe, often fatal illness affecting humans. While licensed therapeutics and vaccines are available, in limited numbers, to treat and prevent infections of Zaire ebolavirus, there are currently no licensed vaccines or therapeutics for SUDV.WHO considers that ongoing challenges in terms of epidemiological surveillance, infection prevention and control programs and practices in health care settings, coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as ongoing outbreaks, such as Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF), Rift Valley fever, yellow fever, cholera, and measles, might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to any re-emergence.Successful SVD outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, early supportive care, risk communication and community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, strengthening laboratory capacity, safe and dignified burials.Although the outbreak has been declared over, WHO advises health authorities to maintain surveillance activities in place. Neighbouring countries are encouraged to remain on alert and continue strengthening their capacities to detect and respond to infectious disease outbreaks.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce SVD and other the transmission of other Ebolavirus diseases in humans:Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to Uganda.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (14 January 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus – Uganda. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON433Outbreak at a glanceOn 18 December 2022, the IHR National Focal Point for Sudan notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old male with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from West Darfur in Western Sudan. The case had onset of paralysis on 31 October. The isolated virus is most closely related to a strain that circulated in Borno State, Nigeria, in 2021, and is unrelated to a cVDPV2 strain that caused an outbreak in Sudan in 2020. On 28 November, the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) launched an immunization campaign for children under the age of 13 years in the affected areas. Field investigations were immediately launched by local and national public health authorities, with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI).Description of the outbreakOn 18 December 2022, the IHR  National Focal Point for Sudan notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old male with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from West Darfur, Western Sudan. The case had the onset of paralysis on 31 October. Two stool specimens were collected on 10 and 12 November 2022 and were confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 16 December. Sequencing results showed that the isolate has undergone 38 nucleotide changes.  The isolated virus is most closely related to the strain that circulated in Borno state, Nigeria, in 2021. The current case is a new importation and is unrelated to the cVDPV2 strain that caused an outbreak in Sudan in 2020. In 2020, the cVDPV2 outbreak affected 15 of 18 states in Sudan. The outbreak was caused by a cVDPV2 imported from Chad, which caused paralysis in 58 children. The end of the outbreak was declared in August 2022, after the Outbreak Response Assessment (OBRA) was conducted from 2 July to 1 August  2022.According to the WHO-UNICEF 2021 estimates of national polio immunization coverage in Sudan, the oral poliovirus vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV 1) coverage were 85% and 94% respectively.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). The FMOH declared the outbreak of polio in Sudan within 24 hours after the laboratory confirmation of the case. Additionally, the FMOH, with support from WHO, UNICEF and partners of the GPEI, have implemented the following public health measures: The emergence of cVDPV2 indicates gaps in routine immunization.  It also highlights the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage everywhere to minimize the risk and consequences of the circulation of any poliovirus, as well as the need to ensure quality surveillance for early detection of any poliovirus.Furthermore, extensive population movement within country and across the borders coupled with sub optimal population immunity due to low vaccination coverage increase the risk of disease spreading across the country.It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than four weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within four weeks to 12 months of travel. Based on the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove their vaccination status.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Sudan based on the information available for this current event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (12 January 2023). Disease Outbreak News;Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) – Sudan . Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2023-DON362Outbreak at a glance This is an update on the yellow fever situation in the WHO African Region since the last disease outbreak news was published on 2 September 2022.From 1 January 2021 to 7 December 2022, a total of 203 confirmed and 252 probable cases with 40 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio 9%) were reported to WHO from 13 countries in the WHO African Region.Risk factors for further yellow fever spread and amplification include low population immunity, population movements, viral transmission dynamics, and climate and environmental factors that have contributed to the spread of Aedes mosquitoes. Recent Reactive Vaccination Campaigns increase population immunity and may have contributed to reducing the risk of yellow fever spread in targeted countries, resulting in a gradual downward trend in reported confirmed cases in 2022. However, the countries remain at high risk.Description of the outbreakIn 2022, 12 countries in the WHO African Region have reported confirmed cases of yellow fever (Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Niger, Nigeria, the Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Uganda). Eight of these countries are experiencing a continuation of transmission from 2021 (Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Nigeria, and the Republic of the Congo) and four countries are newly reporting confirmed cases (Kenya, Niger, Sierra Leone and Uganda). One country, Gabon, reported an isolated confirmed case in 2021, but no further cases were registered in 2022.Since 2021, a total of 203 confirmed and 252 probable cases with 40 deaths and a CFR of 9% have been reported. Of these, 23 deaths have been reported among confirmed cases (CFR among confirmed cases 11%) (Table 1). The high overall CFR among confirmed cases in 2021 (17 deaths, 11%) continued in 2022 (six deaths, 12%).The male-to-female ratio among confirmed cases is not significantly different in 2021 and 2022 (1.3 and 1.6 respectively). The most affected age group amongst confirmed cases in 2021 was 10 years and below; meanwhile, the most affected group in 2022 is 20 to 30 years old. Overall, about 71% of confirmed cases are aged 30 years and below, and children aged 10 years and below are disproportionately affected.According to the WHO/UNICEF Estimates of National Immunization Coverage (WUENIC), in 2021 routine immunization coverage against yellow fever in the African Region for childhood vaccinations was 48%, much lower than the 80% threshold required to confer population immunity against yellow fever, indicating the presence of an underlying susceptible population at risk of yellow fever and the risk of continued transmission. Country-specific estimates of vaccination coverage for 2021 are 54% in Cameroon, 41% in the Central African Republic, 45% in Chad, 67% in the Republic of the Congo, 65% in Côte d’Ivoire, 56% in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 64% in Gabon, 94% in Ghana, 7% in Kenya, 80% in Niger (subnational introduction limited to four counties in 2021), 63% in Nigeria and 85% in Sierra Leone. Uganda has recently rolled-out yellow fever into the Routine Immunization programme.Increasing population immunity through past and ongoing Preventive Mass Vaccination Campaigns (PMVC) supported through the EYE Strategy, and Reactive Vaccination Campaigns (RVC) have increased population immunity rapidly in implementing countries which has contributed to reducing the risk of spread of yellow fever in targeted countries. This may contribute to the gradual downward trend in reported confirmed cases in 2022, but should be noted that there is also variation in virus transmission dynamics that are difficult to predict.Figure 1. Number of probable and confirmed yellow fever cases by week of symptom onset in 13 reporting countries in the WHO African Region (1 January 2021 to 7 December 2022)Figure 2. Distribution of reported probable and confirmed yellow fever cases in 13 countries in the WHO African Region between 1 January 2021 and 7 December 2022Table 1. Classification of reported probable and confirmed yellow fever cases and deaths by country in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 7 December 2022Epidemiology of Yellow feverYellow fever is an epidemic-prone, vaccine-preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when they occur, the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent back pain, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms disappear after 3 to 4 days. A small percentage of cases progress to a toxic phase with systemic infection affecting the liver and kidneys. These individuals can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach.  Death can occur within 7 - 10 days in about half of cases with severe symptoms.Yellow fever is prevented by an effective vaccine, which is safe and affordable. A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to grant sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80-100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated.Surveillance and Laboratory.Reactive vaccinationPreventive mass campaign vaccinationPrevention of International Spread and Points of Entry (PoE) Between 26 August 2022 and 29 November 2022, there have been 22 additional confirmed cases of yellow fever reported from ten countries. However, based on retrospective classification of the cases, there were only seven new confirmed cases and one death. Countries including Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo have reported probable cases that were subsequently discarded, indicating that there is enhanced surveillance put in place. However, there is still persistent yellow fever virus circulation, as several of the recent confirmations have been from locations with little or no underlying immunity (e.g., near urban areas in Cameroon and Uganda; areas with no history of yellow fever vaccination such as Isiolo county, Kenya) hard-to-reach and under-served populations, including children that have been disproportionately impacted.Based on the current situation of yellow fever in the WHO African region, the risk at the regional level was re-assessed as moderate on 12 December 2022 (high in November 2021 and June 2022) due to:1. The decrease in the number of reported cases and the increasing population immunity, since there are ongoing and recent preventive vaccination campaigns, as well as reactive campaigns that have been organized in the affected countries, with more than four million people vaccinated in five countries (Ghana, Cameroon, Chad, the Central African Republic and Kenya), and an estimated 50 million people immunized during the PMVCs in 2021-2022 (Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo) supported by the EYE Strategy.2. There is ongoing yellow fever virus circulation in some high-risk areas, the most recent cases, and outbreaks are reported in areas impacted by underlying risk factors, including gaps in routine immunization, missed special populations (e.g., nomadic or pastoralists and other mobile populations), security and access challenges.3. Most confirmed cases were reported in the last quarter of 2021, however several of the recent confirmations have been from urban areas and/or locations with little or no underlying immunity (e.g., near urban areas in Cameroon and Uganda; areas with no history of yellow fever vaccination);4. Case classifications, and response operations remain a challenge;5. Delays in detection and investigation; delays in the implementation of previously planned PMVC, competing outbreaks and pandemics of COVID-19 and Mpox that are attracting more attention in yellow fever-affected countries, and security constraints in affected areas (the Central African Republic, far North of Cameroon, Eastern - the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Northern Nigeria), population movement, all present risks that could lead to new yellow fever transmission.The overall global risk remains low, as no cases related to this current outbreak have been reported at this stage outside of the African region. However, there are favorable ecosystems for yellow fever outside the African region, especially in the neigbouring countries in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region. There might be challenges in surveillance and immunization capacities due to the potential onward transmission through viremic travellers and due to the presence of the competent vector, if not detected in a timely way.The impact on public health will persist until the ongoing outbreaks are controlled, vaccination coverage is high and immunity gaps in the population are closed. The importation of cases to countries with suboptimal coverage and persisting population immunity gaps poses a high risk and may jeopardize the tremendous efforts invested to achieve elimination.Transmission can be amplified in circumstances where the Aedes mosquitos (day feeder) are present in urban settings and densely populated areas causing rapid spread of the disease.Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighboring countries. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended.Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means for the prevention and control of yellow fever. Yellow fever vaccines approved by WHO are safe, highly effective, and provide life-long protection against infection.The countries reporting yellow fever cases and outbreaks are all high-priority countries for the EYE Strategy. The EYE Strategy recommends that all high-risk countries introduce yellow fever vaccination into their routine immunization (RI) schedule for those aged 9 months (Ethiopia, South Sudan have yet to introduce it into RI). Review of the risk analysis and scope of immunization activities to protect the population could help avert the risk of future outbreaks (e.g. Kenya).To protect populations in high-risk areas in the longer term, it is important to continue the roll-out of Preventive Mass Vaccination Campaigns (PMVCs) and bolster Routine Immunization (RI), as well as take steps to strengthen the application of International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and bolster surveillance for rapid detection aligned to EYE objectives.WHO recommends vaccination for all international travellers, aged 9 months and older, going to areas determined by the WHO Secretariat as at risk for yellow fever transmission and for additional areas the recommendation for vaccination of international travellers is subject to the assessment of the likelihood of exposure of each individual traveller.Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and a single dose provides life-long protection.  Yellow fever vaccination is not recommended for infants younger than 9 months, except during epidemics when the risk of yellow fever virus transmission may be very high. The risks and benefits of vaccination in this age group should be carefully considered before vaccination. The vaccine should be used with caution during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, pregnant or breastfeeding women may be vaccinated during epidemics or if travel to a country or area with a risk of transmission is unavoidable.According to the provisions of the International Health Regulations (IHR), any country may decide to implement the requirement for proof of vaccination against yellow fever for arriving travellers. For international travel purposes, the proof of vaccination against yellow fever is only valid if recorded in the International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis. The International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis becomes valid 10 days after vaccination against yellow fever and extends for the life of the person vaccinated with a WHO-approved vaccine. A booster dose of the yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites, including the use of repellents and insecticide-treated mosquito nets. The highest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening.Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Infected returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present.International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to the Region. The updated areas at-risk for yellow fever transmission and the related recommendations for vaccination of international travellers were updated by WHO on 1 July 2020; the map of revised areas at risk and yellow fever vaccination recommendations is available on the WHO International Travel and Health website.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (3 January 2023). Disease Outbreak News; Yellow fever in East, West, and Central Africa. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON431Outbreak at a glance On 12 November 2022, Indonesia’s Ministry of Health notified WHO of a confirmed case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) from Pidie district in Aceh province. Field investigations were immediately launched by local and national public health authorities, with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. On 28 November, the Ministry of Health launched an immunization campaign for children under the age of 13 years in the affected areas. Description of the outbreakOn 12 November 2022, Indonesia’s Ministry of Health notified WHO of a confirmed case of VDPV2. The case was a   7-year-old boy from Pidie district in Aceh province, who developed AFP on 9 October 2022. The case had not received oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and had no travel history or contact with those who had traveled. On 25 November 2022, three more genetically related isolates of cVDPV2 were reported based on the laboratory results of stool samples taken from three healthy children who were in the same community but not close contacts of the confirmed case. Sequencing results from Biofarma lab showed 25 nucleotide changes for the AFP case and 25 to 26 nucleotide changes for the three asymptomatic children. These results are evidence of transmission of the virus and meets the criteria to be classified as circulating VDPV2 (cVDPV2). In the past in Indonesia, a cVDPV type 1 outbreak was reported in Papua province in 2019. Aceh province has very low polio vaccination coverage in the routine immunization programme; however, coverage is also low in several other provinces in Indonesia, including three provinces nearby Aceh (North Sumatera, West Sumatera and Riau). In 2021, in Aceh province, bivalent oral polio vaccine (OPV3) coverage was 50.9%, and IPV 28.2%. and for Pidie district the coverage was 17.7% for OPV3 and 0.5% for IPV. There is low population immunity against all polioviruses but primarily type 2 in children born after the switch from the trivalent to bivalent OPV in April 2016.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis.The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 continues to affect different areas of the world, notably in the African Region.The Ministry of Health has publicly announced the outbreak, and on 28 November, immunization campaigns were launched for 1.2 million children under the age of 13 years in the province of Aceh.Risk assessment and field investigations were immediately launched and are still ongoing by the local and national public health authorities, with support from the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) partners, including a more detailed assessment of the origin of the isolated viruses.The Ministry of Health, with support from WHO, UNICEF and other partners, is undertaking strong measures to stop the transmission. Measures include enhanced surveillance- active search for AFP cases at health facilities and communities, assessment of OPV/IPV coverage through a rapid community survey in a sample of 200 households, and training on the surveillance guidelines for the use of novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2).The WHO Director General approved the release of the nOPV2 for rapid response on 25 November 2022 and a rapid vaccination response was initiated on 28 November in Pidie district (the affected district) with approximately 95 603 children aged under 13 years to be vaccinated.A rapid response vaccination campaign was launched in Aceh province for those aged zero to 12 years on 5 December 2022. Large-scale supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with nOPV2 are proposed for those aged zero to 12 years in Aceh and zero to four years in North Sumatera, West Sumatra, and Riau in the first week of January 2023 and the first week of February 2023.Advocacy campaigns, risk communication messaging, and social mobilization have been implemented.WHO assesses the risk to be high at the national level due to low polio vaccination coverage in Aceh and other provinces in Indonesia, the susceptibility of the population to poliovirus type 2 after switching from trivalent oral polio vaccine (tOVP) to bOPV in April 2016 combined with low uptake of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV), sub-optimal surveillance capacity, and vaccine hesitancy among the at-risk population.The detection of cVDPVs highlights the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage everywhere to minimize the risk and consequences of the circulation of any poliovirus, as well as the need to ensure quality surveillance for early detection of any poliovirus. It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence any planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio.As per the advice of the Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005) on the international spread of poliovirus, countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country that have had an importation of cVDPV2 with local transmission should (i) declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency (ii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel, (iii) ensure that travellers who receive such vaccination have access to an appropriate document to record their polio vaccination status, (iv) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, and (v) intensify regional cooperation and cross border coordination to enhance surveillance for prompt detection of poliovirus, and vaccinate refugees, travellers and cross border populations, according to the advice of the Advisory Group.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Indonesia based on the information available for this current event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (19 December 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2)-Indonesia. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON430GLOBAL OVERVIEWCurrent Situation                                                                                    Since 2021, there has been an increase in cholera cases and their geographical distribution globally. In 2021, 23 countries reported cholera outbreaks, mainly in the WHO Regions of Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean. This trend has continued into 2022 with over 29 countries (Figure 1) reporting cholera cases or outbreaks. As of 30 November 2022, 16 of these have been reporting protracted outbreaks. Many of those countries reported higher case numbers and case fatality ratio (CFR) than in previous years. The average cholera CFR reported globally in 2021 was 1.9% (2.9% in Africa), well above acceptable (<1%) and the highest recorded in over a decade.This year the number of cholera cases and cholera-associated deaths have surged globally following years of decline. Of particular concern are the outbreaks in 13 countries, which did not report cholera cases in 2021. Of these, some had not reported any cholera outbreaks for many years (between three and 30), and several are not considered cholera-endemic countries.i,ii The current situation represents a resurgence of the ongoing seventh pandemic of cholera which began in 1961.The simultaneous progression of several cholera outbreaks, compounded in countries facing complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems and aggravated by climate change, poses challenges to outbreak response and risks further spreading to other countries. The overall capacity to respond to the multiple and simultaneous outbreaks is strained due to the global lack of resources, including the oral cholera vaccine, as well as overstretched public health and medical personnel, who are often dealing with multiple disease outbreaks at the same time.  EpidemiologyCholera is an acute diarrheal infection characterized, in its severe form, by extreme watery diarrhea and potentially fatal dehydration. It is caused by the ingestion of food or water contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It has a short incubation period, ranging between two hours and five days. Most people will develop no or only mild symptoms; less than 20% of ill persons develop acute watery diarrhoea with moderate or severe dehydration and are at risk for rapid loss of body fluids, dehydration, and death. Despite being easily treatable with rehydration solution, cholera remains a global threat due to its high morbidity and mortality in vulnerable populations with a lack of access to adequate health care.Seven distinct pandemics of cholera have been recorded during the past two centuries. The seventh pandemic, which is still ongoing today, is considered to have occurred principally between 1961 to 1974. During this period, following (re)introduction, many countries transitioned to becoming cholera-endemic. While global incidence greatly decreased in the late 1990s, cholera remained prevalent in parts of Africa and Asia.The global burden of cholera is largely unknown because the majority of cases are not reported, however, previous studies estimate 2.9 million cases, and 95,000 deaths occur annually.Figure-2: Cholera cases* reported to WHO by year and continent, global CFR, 1989-2021**DRIVERS OF THE CURRENT OUTBREAKS AND CHALLENGES IMPACTING THE RESPONSEThe main drivers and challenges for controlling and containing the current cholera outbreaks are outlined below. Yet, addressing the need for,  and lack of funding to prevent outbreaks is critical. Large-scale investments in water and sanitation infrastructure have largely led to the elimination of cholera in Europe and the Americas. Significant investments should support water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) interventions for cholera prevention and control. Such interventions should consider the social context and be supported by the best available evidence and updated models of cholera transmission.1Of the countries that have reported cholera outbreaks in 2022, many are experiencing natural disasters such as cyclones (Mozambique, Malawi), flooding (Pakistan, Nigeria), and drought (countries in the Horn of Africa). Major flooding and above-normal hurricane seasons increase outbreak severity and the propensity for regional spread. The upcoming rainy/cyclone season, which is predicted to be severe, has the potential to spread the disease across Southern Africa. The above-normal hurricane season in the Americas is affecting several countries in the Caribbean and Central America causing major flooding. Post-monsoon season (and post-floods) is usually associated with a cholera peak in South Asia. Additionally, many countries experienced droughts leading to cholera2 due to poor access to water, marginalization of refugees and nomadic populations, and expansion of informal urban settlements.Increasing humanitarian crises due to conflict, political instability, and a lack of development are leaving an increasing number of people at risk for cholera across all WHO regions. Of the countries that have reported outbreaks, nine are experiencing conflict or political violence in affected areas (Afghanistan, Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nigeria, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, and Yemen). In two of these countries (Ethiopia and Cameroon), the current outbreak is not affecting conflict areas, but there is a high risk of spreading into areas of ongoing conflict, which would complicate the response.Several countries with cholera outbreaks are also responding to multiple other disease outbreaks including mpox (monkeypox), dengue, chikungunya, measles, and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This also strains the overall response capacity to cholera, particularly in countries with limited resources.The lack of data hinders response. There are several country- and surveillance-specific reasons for the lack of data: (1) Countries with inadequate surveillance systems overall; (2) Countries with robust surveillance systems, which only report cholera from sentinel sites or do not include cholera at all; (3) Lack of data sharing; (4) Breakdown of surveillance systems during humanitarian crises and political instability; (5) Insufficient capacity for lab confirmation and use of heterogenous case definitions (eg. cholera versus acute watery diarrhea).At the time of this report, the global supply of cholera kits is depleted, and suppliers are struggling to meet demand. Delays or shortages of medical supplies can lead to preventable and avoidable deaths. WHO is facilitating global coordination and alternate sources of supply are being sought, but these will not be available immediately.The number of outbreaks and geographic scope has stretched the capacity of healthcare services to implement a comprehensive multisectoral response. Parallel large-scale, high-risk outbreaks and other public health and humanitarian crises are further stretching resources and limiting the capacity to respond. In addition, the emigration of skilled medical personnel during a humanitarian crisis, interruption in routine health services such as vaccination leading to (re)-emergence of vaccine-preventable diseases, destruction or inaccessibility of healthcare infrastructure, and violence against health workers have hindered outbreak response activities.The global stockpile of Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV) is currently insufficient to meet all requests for two doses of preventive vaccination. As a result, on 20 October 2022, the International Coordinating Group (ICG) members (IFRC, MSF, UNICEF, and WHO) took the unprecedented decision to temporarily limit all reactive OCV campaigns to one single dose. The production of OCV is a continuous process with around 2.5 million doses produced monthly. As vaccine manufacturers are producing at their maximum current capacity, there is no short-term solution to increase production. While using a single dose instead of two doses will allow more people to be protected in the short term, this strategy has its limitations, and it is unclear how long immunity will last. To solve the problem in the long term there needs to be an increase in global vaccine production. Since the creation of the global stockpile in 2013, more than 50 million doses of OCV have been successfully used in various settings through mass campaigns.3REGIONAL OVERVIEWIn the table below, some countries under monitoring are described. These include countries with recently reported outbreaks of cholera, countries where we have observed a continuous rise in cases with challenges to control the outbreak, countries with protracted outbreaks with challenges to control, countries with repeated outbreaks in 2022, countries with large vulnerable populations, and countries where insecurity and conflict hinder the response. WHO is working with partners at global, regional & country level to support Member States in the following cholera outbreak response activities:CoordinationSurveillanceVaccineCase managementInfection Prevention and Control (IPC)Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE)Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)Operations, Support, and Logistics (OSL)On 26 October 2022, WHO assessed the risk of cholera at the global level as very high, remaining a global threat to public health and an indicator of inequity and lack of social development. There has been an increase in global reported cholera outbreaks with 29 countries, mainly in the WHO African and Eastern Mediterranean Regions, reporting outbreaks to WHO in 2022 with many of those reporting higher case numbers and case fatality ratios (CFR) than in previous years.Several countries are in the midst of complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems, inadequate access to clean water and sanitation, and insufficient capacity to respond to these outbreaks. Climate change and lack of development also contribute to outbreaks, and cross-border population movements. The latter, along with increased global travel following the COVID-19 pandemic, further increase the risk of international spread.The number of outbreaks occurring simultaneously across all WHO Regions is straining the overall epidemic response capacity. Protracted outbreaks of cholera are draining public health response personnel and depleting resources.Due to the global shortage of OCV, the ICG recently made the unprecedented decision to temporarily suspend the second dose strategy for the outbreak response. There are also significant delays and shortages of medical supplies that can lead to preventable and avoidable deaths.WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Effective risk communication and community engagement strategies are needed to encourage behavioral change and adoption of appropriate preventive measures.The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of patients to less than 1%.WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Member States based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak also affects border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Member States to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing across all levels of the organization so that any spread across the border is quickly assessed and contained.ReferencesCitable reference: World Health Organization (16 December 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera – Global situation. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON426Situation at a glanceAs of 8 December 2022, at least five Member States in the European Region, reported to WHO an increase in cases of invasive group A streptococcus (iGAS) disease and in some cases also scarlet fever. An increase in iGAS-related deaths has also been reported in some of these countries. Children under 10 years of age represent the most affected age group.Group A Streptococcal (GAS) infection commonly causes mild illnesses such as tonsillitis, pharyngitis, impetigo, cellulitis and scarlet fever. However, in rare instances, GAS infection can lead to invasive iGAS, which can cause life-threatening conditions.The observed increase may reflect an early start to the GAS infection season coinciding with an increase in the circulation of respiratory viruses and possible viral coinfection which may increase the risk of invasive GAS disease. This is in the context of increased population mixing following a period of reduced circulation of GAS during the COVID-19 pandemic.In light of the moderate increase in cases of iGAS, GAS endemicity, no new emm gene sequence type identified and no reports of increased antibiotic resistance, WHO assesses that the risk for the general population posed by iGAS infections is low at present.Description of the situationDuring 2022, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, have been observing an increase in cases of invasive group A streptococcus disease and scarlet fever, mostly affecting children under 10 years of age. The increase has been particularly marked during the second half of the year.In France, since mid-November 2022, clinicians have reported to Santé Publique France (SpF) and the Regional Health Agencies (ARS), an unusual increase in the number of iGAS cases and the detection of iGAS clusters. Some pediatric cases have been fatal. On 8 December, SpF published a status update reporting an increase in the number of iGAS infections in France since the beginning of 2022 in different regions (Occitanie, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, Nouvelle-Aquitaine), mainly in children under 10 years of age. SpF also detected an increase in cases of scarlet fever reported in outpatient clinics in the country since September 2022.On 6 December, the Irish Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC) reported an increase in iGAS cases in Ireland since the beginning of October. In 2022, as of 8 December, 57 iGAS cases have been notified to HPSC, of which 15 were in children less than 10 years of age. Twenty-three of the 57 iGAS cases have been reported since October 2022, compared to the 11 cases reported for the same period of 2019 (pre-COVID-19 pandemic).The Public Health Agency of the Netherlands (RIVM) observed an increase in iGAS infections among children from March 2022 onward. Data between March and July 2022 indicates increased numbers of iGAS cases caused by different known emm gene sequence types (the gene encoding the M virulence protein responsible for many Streptococcus pyogenes serotypes). This increase has thus far not subsided. Coinfections with varicella zoster and respiratory viruses were noted.In Sweden, since October 2022, an increase in iGAS in children under 10 years of age has been noted as compared to COVID-19 pre-pandemic levels for the equivalent period. Out of the 93 cases reported from October to 7 December, 16 (17.2%) occurred among children under 10 years of age. Between October and December 2018, seven iGAS cases were reported in this age group and 10 cases in 2019. According to the Public Health Agency of Sweden, during the season 1 July 2021 through 30 June 2022, 220 cases of iGAS were reported, compared to 173 cases reported in the previous season 2020/21. The highest numbers of iGAS cases, since iGAS became notifiable in Sweden in 2004, were reported before the pandemic in 2018/19 with 794 cases (incidence 7.8 per 100 000) and in 2017/18 with 800 cases (incidence 7.9 per 100 000).According to the UK Health Security Agency, following a higher-than-expected scarlet fever activity in the summer in England, with a decrease during August 2022, notifications from mid-September to early December have increased again, remaining above what is normally seen at this time of year. A total of 4622 notifications of scarlet fever were reported from weeks 37 to 46 of the current season (2022/23), with 851 notifications received in week 46. This compares with an average of 1294 (range 258 to 2008) for this same period (weeks 37 to 46) in the previous five years. As expected, several scarlet fever outbreaks in nurseries and schools are being reported, of which a number involve the co-circulation of respiratory viruses. Likewise, in the summer of 2022, the levels of iGAS notifications were higher than expected, and iGAS notifications are currently higher than have been recorded over the last five seasons in all age groups (average 248, range 142 to 357 notifications). As of 8 December, 509 notifications of iGAS disease were reported through laboratory surveillance in England, with a weekly high of 73 notifications in week 46 (week commencing on 14 November). So far this season and as of 8 December 2022, the United Kingdom reported 13 deaths within seven days of an iGAS diagnosis in children under 15 years in England. This compares with four deaths in the same period in the 2017 to 2018 (pre-COVID-19 pandemic) season. Antimicrobial susceptibility results from routine laboratory surveillance in the United Kingdom indicated no increased antibiotic resistance. Additionally, laboratory surveillance has not revealed newly emerging emm gene sequence types.Epidemiology of Group A StreptococcusStreptococcus pyogenes, also known as Group A Streptococcus, is a group of Gram-positive bacteria which can be carried in human throats or skin; it is responsible for more than 500 000 deaths annually worldwide.Transmission occurs by close contact with an infected person and can be passed on through coughs, sneezes, or contact with a wound.GAS infection commonly causes mild illnesses such as tonsillitis, pharyngitis, impetigo, cellulitis and scarlet fever. GAS infections are easily treated with antibiotics, and a person with a mild illness stops being contagious after 24 hours of treatment.GAS is considered a common cause of bacterial pharyngitis in school-aged children and may also affect younger children. The incidence of GAS pharyngitis usually peaks during winter months and early spring. Outbreaks in kindergartens and schools are common. GAS pharyngitis is diagnosed by rapid antigen tests (Rapid Strep) or bacterial culture and is treated with antibiotics and supportive care. Good hand hygiene and general personal hygiene can help control transmission.However, in rare instances, GAS infection can lead to invasive GAS, which can cause life-threatening conditions, such as necrotizing fasciitis, streptococcal toxic shock syndrome and other severe infections, as well as post-immune mediated diseases, such as poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.Enhanced surveillance activities have been implemented in the countries reporting an increase in iGAS cases, together with public health messages addressing the general population and clinicians, in order to enhance early recognition, reporting and prompt treatment initiation of GAS cases. An alert has been issued to other countries to be vigilant for a similar rise in cases and to report any unexpected increased national or regional incidence of iGAS infections to WHO.WHO continues to support countries in assessing and responding to the epidemiological situation across the region and to provide recommendations to the public.WHO currently assesses the risk for the general population posed by the reported increase in iGAS infections in some European countries as low, considering the moderate rise in iGAS cases, GAS endemicity, no newly emerging emm gene sequence types identified, and no observed increases in antibiotic resistance.The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.The reports of these events do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of iGAS.General recommendationsClinical recommendationsLaboratory and Surveillance recommendationsTravelWHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade for any affected countries based on available information about this event. Citable reference: World Health Organization (15 December 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Increased incidence of scarlet fever and invasive Group A Streptococcus infection - multi-country. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON429Source: Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation Reports*Following a data reconciliation exercise, one case previously classified as ‘dead’ has been re-classified as ‘recovered’Description of the situationSince the last Disease Outbreak News published on 24 November, one new confirmed case of Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) was reported on 27 November in Kassanda district. According to information shared by the Ministry of Health, the new case was a stillborn baby delivered at 28 weeks of gestation. The mother was infected with SUDV while pregnant and had since recovered and was in good condition at the time of delivery.Since the outbreak declaration on 20 September, to 5 December 2022, a total of 142 confirmed cases have been reported by the Uganda Ministry of Health. Among them, 55 deaths occurred leading to a CFR of 39%. In addition, 22 probable cases (all are deaths) have been also reported. The number of cases among healthcare workers (HCWs) remains unchanged since the last DON report, with 19 confirmed cases, and seven deaths.On 2 December, Uganda health authorities announced that all patients have been discharged from Ebola treatment units (ETUs) and that no more cases are currently hospitalized. As of 5 December, there are no active cases.As of 5 December 2022, out of 2564 contacts listed, 2167 (84.5%), have completed the 21-day follow-up period. There are currently 36 contacts actively being followed up in four districts, with a follow-up rate of 100%.Figure 1. Number of confirmed and probable cases of Ebola disease caused by SUDV by date of symptom onset, with 3-day moving average, as of 5 December 2022. Source: Ebola Virus Disease in Uganda Situation Report - 69Table 1. Number of cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 5 December.Figure 2. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 5 December 2022.For further information on the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, see the latest situation reports jointly published by the Ministry of Health and the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879.Following a Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Request for Assistance, as of 7 December, there have been 66 offers of support received from 23 partner institutions. Five experts are currently deployed through GOARN in the functions of case management, infection prevention and control and Go.Data implementation. Additional offers of support have been received for the functions of water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), epidemiology and surveillance, partner coordination and laboratory capacities. In addition to the GOARN Request for Assistance, partners continue to support the Ministry of Health led response across multiple areas.WHO held expert consultations to identify candidate therapeutics and vaccines for inclusion in trials throughout October and November 2022 and developed clinical trial protocols for both vaccine and therapeutic candidates against Sudan ebolavirus. The experts recommended that three candidate vaccines should be included in the planned ring vaccination trial: VSV-SUDV from Merck/IAVI, ChAd3-SUDV from the Sabin Vaccine Institute, and biEBOV from Oxford University/Jenner Institute. On 8 December, 1200 doses of one of these candidate vaccines arrived in the country and will be evaluated in a clinical trial.WHO is working closely with partners on the ‘accelerated campaign’ in Kampala, carrying out Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) activities. A festive season RCCE plan was developed to orient RCCE activities in Uganda and prevention in neighboring countries during this period.WHO continues to support the Uganda MoH and collaborate with partners to implement Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures in health facilities to prevent onward transmission including development of a national IPC strategy for SUDV response, implementation of screening, isolation and notification of suspect cases and health worker trainings. The IPC ring approach has been implemented and remains in place to support facilities and communities in the event of a confirmed case is reported.Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countriesWHO has revised the prioritization of the surrounding countries after conducting a risk assessment. In addition to the six surrounding countries (Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, South Sudan, Rwanda and Tanzania) that were assessed to be at-risk, five additional countries, with important population movements to and from Uganda, have been included, namely Central African Republic, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia, and Sudan.The Ministries of Health, WHO, in-country and international partners, are supporting SUDV preparedness and operational readiness activities in these countries. Summary of the country’s preparedness and operational readiness activities (no new updates for Djibouti, Somalia and Sudan):On 6 December, WHO Regional Office for Africa in partnership with Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, West African Health Organization, United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, UK Health Security Agency, Robert Koch Institute and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, implemented a two-day public health emergency operation centre (PHEOC) simulation exercise with 36 countries in the WHO African Region, to improve readiness to respond to public health emergencies.On 4 November 2022, WHO revised the rapid risk assessment for this event from high to very high at the national level, and from low to high at the regional level, while the risk remained low at the global level. As of 8 December 2022, WHO’s assessment of risk remains unchanged.The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.Successful SUDV disease outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, strengthening laboratory capacity, safe and dignified burials.Health-care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g., hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision for implementation is required to reduce risks of health care facilities amplifying the outbreak.Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate WASH facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management) and community engagement and social mobilization are essential to prevent and mitigate ongoing transmission.Upon case identification, early diagnosis and early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly improve survival. There are currently no proven therapeutics for SUDV but candidate therapeutics are available and due to be used in randomized controlled trials.  Care of SUDV patients should occur in safely designed isolation and treatment/care centers with trained health workers.Establishing active surveillance at points of entry is an essential component of the outbreak response to mitigate the risk of international spread due to the high cross-border mobility between Uganda and neighbouring countries.There are no licensed vaccines for SUDV, but there are candidate vaccines which are going be used in trials.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak. Citable reference: World Health Organization (8 December 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus – Uganda. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON428Outbreak at a glance As of 20 November 2022, a total of 52 807 laboratory-confirmed dengue cases and 230 related deaths have been reported by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare of Bangladesh since 1 January 2022 with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 0.44%. Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh however a surge of cases started in June 2022. Currently, all eight divisions in the country are reporting cases and deaths. This is the second-largest outbreak since 2000, with the largest having occurred in 2019. The current dengue outbreak is unusual in its scale and seasonality.Description of the outbreakBetween 1 January and 20 November 2022, a total of 52 807 dengue cases including 230 related deaths (case fatality rate = 0.44%) were reported by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MOHFW) (Figure 1). The cases were confirmed either by non-structural protein (NS1) diagnostic kits or by Immunoglobulin M (IgM) tests. According to information available for 40% of reported cases (n=20 982) the median age is 25 years (range: 0 – 89) with males accounting for 60% of the cases. This is the second highest annual number of cases since 2000, the highest having occurred in 2019, when 101 354 cases including 164 deaths were reported (Figure 2 & 3).The most affected division is Dhaka, accounting for 70.6% of cases and 60.4% of deaths. Dhaka city, the largest city in Bangladesh, located in Dhaka division, has reported 64.5% (n= 34 071) of the total number of cases. Other affected divisions include Chattogram division (13.2% of cases and 24.8% of deaths) and Khulna division (5.5% of cases and 4.8% of deaths) (Figure 4).The high incidence of dengue cases this year is taking place in the context of an unusual amount of rainfall since June 2022, accompanied by high temperatures and high humidity which have resulted in an increased mosquito population throughout Bangladesh.Figure 1.   Number of dengue cases and deaths reported in Bangladesh from 1 January to 20 November 2022.*The data for November is incompleteFigure 2.  Number of dengue cases and case fatality rates reported by year in Bangladesh from 1 January 2000 to 20 November 2022.*Data up to 20 November 2022Figure 3: Number of dengue cases reported by week for the period from 2017 to 2022 (until week 46, as of 20 November)Figure 4.  Number of dengue cases by district in Bangladesh from 1 January to 20 November 2022. Epidemiology of dengueDengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) and it is possible to be infected by each. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness.There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.Dengue was first recorded in the 1960s in Bangladesh (then East Pakistan) and was known as “Dacca fever”. The establishment of the Aedes aegypti mosquito vector and urban cycles have made dengue endemic in Bangladesh. The growth factor of dengue cases since 2010 appeared to be linked to regional rainfall patterns (May to September) and is coincidental with higher environmental temperatures. Bangladesh’s climate conditions are becoming more favorable for the transmission of dengue and other vector-borne diseases like malaria and chikungunya due to excessive rainfall, waterlogging, flooding, rise in temperature and the unusual shifts in the country’s traditional seasons.  Bangladesh experienced a moderate rainfall during October this year which was unusual (monsoon is from May to September). Due to the untimely rainfall and favorable climate conditions, the density of the Aedes mosquito population is increasing. In addition, many people keep water in different containers like buckets and pots in their houses, enabling Aedes mosquitos to readily breed in such artificial collections of water.A pre-monsoon survey carried out by the health directorate earlier this year found a higher density of Aedes mosquitoes in the capital compared to 2021. Experts in the Communicable Disease Control (CDC) unit of the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS) predicted a worsening dengue situation this year in Dhaka city unless preventive steps were taken. The CDC unit revealed its most recent monsoon survey in September and found that mosquito density was twice as high in Dhaka city as in the pre-monsoon survey.Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection caused by four dengue virus serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). The predominant currently circulating serotype in Bangladesh is unknown at this stage, but limited serotyping has detected dengue virus 3 (DENV-3) and dengue virus 4 (DENV-4). DENV-3 has been consistently predominant since 2019 but DEN-4 has not been reported for several years.Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality. There is no specific treatment. However, early recognition of dengue virus infection and appropriate clinical management can reduce disease severity and mortality among dengue patients. At present, the number of severe dengue cases and case-fatality rates appear to be increasing, likely due to late health-seeking behaviour and access issues.With the receding COVID-19 pandemic, the travel restrictions have been lifted. This has led to the movement of people to and from Dhaka. Although there have been concerted efforts by the Local Government Engineering Department (LGED), City Corporations, and the Ministry of Health towards curbing the dengue outbreak in Dhaka in the past few months, yet the continued movements have led to an inflow of possibly infected individuals with a potential to contribute to dengue transmission cycles. Vector control activities have been less intense in the other districts of Bangladesh. The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. Although dengue does not directly spread from human-to-human, Aedes species mosquitoes can become infected after biting dengue-infected individuals, thus creating a cycle of transmission capable of spreading dengue and leading to clusters of cases.The prevention and control of dengue depends on effective vector control. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including the mosquito genus Aedes (the primary vector for dengue). IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e., environmental management and source reduction, biological control, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Bangladesh should implement the IVM strategy developed in 2021.Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals). Vector control activities can include covering, draining, and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis. Space spraying with insecticide can be deployed as an emergency measure. Chlorination and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage in outdoor containers should also be considered.Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the topical application of repellents to exposed skin or on clothing, and the use of long sleeve shirts and pants. Indoor protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning, can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day.There is no specific treatment for dengue infection; however, early detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue, and timely access to appropriate clinical management are key elements of care to reduce the risk for severe dengue complications and deaths due to dengue. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated to the strengthening of laboratory sample referral mechanisms for the confirmation and sub-typing of the dengue virus.WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions be applied to Bangladesh based on the information available for this event. Citable reference: World Health Organization (28November 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue – Bangladesh. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON424   Source: Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation ReportsDescription of the situationSince the outbreak declaration on 20 September, a total of 141 confirmed cases and 55 confirmed deaths (CFR 39%) from Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) have been reported by the Uganda Ministry of Health as of 21 November. In addition, 22 probable cases (all are deaths) have been reported since the beginning of the outbreak. Overall, 19 cases with seven deaths occurred among healthcare workers (HCWs).The weekly number of confirmed cases reported has decreased for the third consecutive week (Figure 1) after the peak observed in the week 17-23 October. During the week commencing 7 November, five confirmed and one probable case was reported, including one confirmed case and one probable death from a newly affected district (Jinja), in the Eastern Region of Uganda, which is 80 km distant from Kampala. The most recent confirmed case was reported by the Uganda MoH on 14 November, from Kampala district.Figure 1. Number of confirmed and probable cases of Ebola disease caused by SUDV by date of symptom onset, with 3-day moving average, as of 21 November 2022. Source: Ebola Virus Disease in Uganda Situation Report - 57A higher proportion of cases are male (57.5%), and the most affected age group is represented by those aged 20-29 years, followed by those aged 30-39 years (Figure 2). Around 25% of cases are reported among children under 10 years old, indicating potential household transmission.Figure 2. Age and sex distribution of confirmed and probable cases of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, as of 21 November 2022. Source: Ebola Virus Disease in Uganda Situation Report - 57Since the last DON published on 10 November, one newly affected district has been reported (Jinja), leading to a total of nine districts that have reported confirmed SVD cases. The most affected district remains Mubende with 64 (45%) confirmed cases and 29 (53%) confirmed deaths, followed by Kassanda with 48 (34%) confirmed cases and 20 (36%) confirmed deaths. Two districts, Bunyangabu and Kagadi, have not reported cases for more than 42 days.Table 1. Number of cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 21 November.Figure 3. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 21 November 2022.Although there is significant improvement in surveillance activities in most affected districts, contact tracing gaps have been reported in newly affected districts. The suboptimal performance could be attributed to different factors, such as the non-reporting of probable cases, high population mobility including the movement of non-listed and/or missing contacts, and initial gaps in human and material resources. Surveillance strengthening plans have been put in place in newly affected districts. Since the beginning of the outbreak, 4652 contacts have been registered, of which 3599 (78%) have completed the 21-day follow-up period.As of 21 November, a total of 700 contacts in five districts (Jinja, Kampala, Kassanda, Masaka, and Mubende) were under active surveillance. In the week commencing 14 November, the average follow-up rate was 65%, representing a decrease of 26% in the follow-up rate as compared to 91% the previous week. Follow-up rates have been particularly low in Jinja and Masaka, at an average of 42% and 53%.Figure 4. Weekly average number of contacts under active follow-up and follow-up rate, as of 21 November 2022. Graph re-produced using data reported in the Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation ReportsThe daily number of alerts received has not been regularly reported to WHO since 7 November, however, the number of alerts verified has been reported. During the week commencing 14 November, at least 953 alerts were verified (daily average 159), of which 335 (35%) met the definition of a suspected case.For further information on the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, see the latest situation reports jointly published by the Ministry of Health and the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879.In addition to responding to this outbreak, the MoH and WHO are also responding to an ongoing outbreak of Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) in Uganda, supporting clinical management and facilitating a referral pathway for the effective isolation and treatment of suspected and confirmed cases of CCHF and SUDV disease.Following a Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Request for Assistance, as of 22 November, there have been 52 offers of support received from 21 partner institutions. Six experts are currently deployed through GOARN in the functions of case management, partner coordination and infection prevention and control. Additional offers of support have been received for the functions of water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), epidemiology and surveillance, and laboratory capacities. In addition to the GOARN Request for Assistance, partners continue to support the Ministry of Health-led response across multiple areas.WHO held expert consultations to identify candidate therapeutics and vaccines for inclusion in trials throughout October and November 2022 and to draft clinical trial protocols for both vaccine and therapeutic candidates against Sudan ebolavirus. WHO also requested the existing COVID-19 Vaccine Prioritisation Working Group (WG) to extend its COVID-19 remit to rapidly evaluate the suitability of candidate SUDV vaccines for inclusion in the planned trial in Uganda using similar considerations on safety, potential efficacy and logistic issues relating to availability and implementation. The experts recommended that three candidate vaccines should be included in the planned ring vaccination trial: VSV-SUDV from Merck/IAVI, ChAd3-SUDV from the Sabin Institute, and biEBOV from Oxford University/Jenner Institute. The first doses of one of these vaccine candidates are expected to arrive in the country soon.Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countriesWHO has revised the prioritization of the surrounding countries after conducting a risk assessment. In addition to the six surrounding countries that were assessed to be at-risk, five additional countries are being included, namely Central African Republic, Ethiopia, Somalia, Sudan and Djibouti. These countries have important population movements to and from Uganda. WHO has started to engage with these countries and will report their readiness activities in the next DON report.The Ministries of Health of the six neighboring countries (Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, and the United Republic of Tanzania), in-country and international partners, and WHO are supporting SUDV readiness actions.  On 4 November 2022, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from high to very high at the national level, and from low to high at the regional level, while the risk remained low at the global level.The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.Successful SUDV disease outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, strengthening laboratory capacity, safe and dignified burials.Health-care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g., hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision for implementation is required to reduce risks of health care facilities amplifying the outbreak.Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate WASH facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management) and community engagement and social mobilization are essential to prevent and mitigate ongoing transmission.Upon case identification, early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly improve survival.Establishing active surveillance at points of entry is an essential component of the outbreak response to mitigate the risk of international spread due to the high cross-border mobility between Uganda and neighbouring countries.There are no licensed vaccines for SUDV, but there are candidate vaccines which are due to be used in trials.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 November 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus – Uganda. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON425Outbreak at a glance From 29 December 2021 to 31 October 2022, four laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) were reported to WHO by the Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. No deaths were reported.  Household contacts for the four cases were followed-up by the Ministry of Health, and no secondary cases were identified. The notification of these cases reiterates the need for global awareness of MERS-CoV but does not change the overall risk assessment. Description of the casesSince the last Disease Outbreaks News on MERS-CoV in Saudi Arabia published on 7 April 2022, the IHR National Focal Point of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has reported four additional cases, with no associated deaths.Between 29 December 2021 and 31 October 2022, four cases of locally acquired Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection were reported from Riyadh (two cases), Gassim (one case), and Makka Al Mukarramah (one case) regions (Figure 1). Laboratory confirmation of the cases was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).All the cases were non-health-care workers, who presented with fever, cough, and shortness of breath, and had comorbidities. Three of the cases had a history of contact with dromedary camels and consumption of their raw milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. Three of the cases were male and the overall age range is 23 to 74-year-old.Since the first report of MERS-CoV in 2012, a total of 2600 cases with 935 associated deaths have been reported from 27 countries, in all six WHO regions. The majority of MERS-CoV cases (n=2193; 84%) resulting in 854 deaths, have been reported from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Figure 2).Figure 1. Geographical distribution of MERS-CoV cases between 29 December 2021 – 31 October 2022 by city and region, Saudi Arabia (n=4).Table 1. MERS-CoV cases reported between 29 December 2021 – 31 October 2022Figure 2: Distribution of cases and deaths from MERS-CoV in Saudi Arabia from 2013 to 20221Epidemiology of MERS-CoVMiddle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Approximately 36% of patients with MERS have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems, with case fatality rates counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the virus. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings. Outside of the healthcare setting, there has been limited human-to-human transmission.MERS-CoV infections range from showing no symptoms (asymptomatic) or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS-CoV disease is fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems and those with comorbidities or chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes.No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and treatments are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms.Follow-up of the household contacts was conducted for all four cases, and no secondary cases were identified.For the three cases reporting contact with camels, the Ministry of Agriculture was informed, and an investigation of camels was conducted. The identified positive camels were isolated.The Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is working to improve testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.Between September 2012 and 17 October 2022, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2600 with 935 associated deaths. Most of these cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. There has been one large outbreak outside of the Middle East in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in the Republic of Korea and 1 in China) and 38 deaths were reported, however, the index case in that outbreak had a travel history to the Middle East. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected Member States.The notification of the four cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or in a healthcare setting. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. The number of MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO has substantially declined since the beginning of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This is likely the result of epidemiological surveillance activities for COVID-19 being prioritized, resulting in reduced testing and detection of MERS-CoV cases. In addition, measures taken during the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission (e.g. mask-wearing, hand hygiene, physical distancing, improving the ventilation of indoor spaces, respiratory etiquette, stay-at-home orders, reduced mobility) are also likely reduce opportunities for onward human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV. However, the circulation of MERS-CoV in dromedary camels is not likely to have been impacted by these measures. Therefore, while the number of reported secondary cases of MERS has been reduced, the risk of zoonotic transmission remains.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully investigate any unusual patterns.Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities. Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures or in settings where aerosol-generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, follow-up and quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate IPC measures in health care setting and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, race tracks or slaughterhouses where the virus may be circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid handling or consuming raw camel milk or camel urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.Citable reference: World Health Organization (16 November 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) – Saudi Arabia. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON422Description of the outbreakFrom when the outbreak was declared on 20 September until 7 November, a total of 136 confirmed cases and 53 confirmed deaths (CFR 38.9%) from Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) have been reported, representing an increase of 18% and 66% respectively since the last DON published on 28 October 2022. In addition, 21 probable deaths have been also reported since the beginning of the outbreak, with the last probable death notified on 29 September. Three additional cases and three additional deaths have been reported among healthcare workers since 28 October, resulting in a total of 18 cases and seven deaths among these workers.Since the last DON, one newly affected district has been reported (Masaka), leading to a total of eight districts reporting cases. The most affected district remains Mubende with 63 (46%) confirmed cases and 29 (55%) confirmed deaths, followed by Kassanda with 46 (34%) confirmed cases and 19 (36%) confirmed deaths. Two districts, Bunyangabu and Kagadi, have not reported cases for more than 40 days.As of 7 November, a total of 1386 contacts in seven districts are currently under surveillance, with a follow-up rate of 92%. In the week commencing 31 October, an average of 1586 contacts were followed up daily, a  decrease of 16% from the previous week (week commencing 24 October) when a daily average of 1896 contacts were followed up. A total of 34 contacts developed symptoms during the past week. Since the beginning of the outbreak, 3867 contacts have been registered, of which 2237 (68%) have completed the 21-day follow-up period.As of 7 November, at least 2835 alerts have been received at a daily average of 71 alerts. Approximately 94% (n=2671) of all alerts received were investigated within 24 hours, of which 1120 were validated as suspected cases. The proportion of alerts investigated within 24 hours has been steadily increasing, and in the week commencing 31 October, nearly all alerts (657/659) were investigated within 24 hours, of which 31% (n=203) were validated as suspected cases.Since the beginning of the outbreak, a total of 2139 samples were collected (suspects, repeat samples, swabs), of which 419 in the week commencing on 31 October (+11% increase as compared to the previous week when 377 samples were collected and tested).Figure 1. Cases (confirmed and probable) and deaths (confirmed) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV by date of illness onset, as of 7 November 2022. Graph re-produced using data reported in the Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation ReportsTable 1. Number of Cases (confirmed and probable) and deaths (confirmed) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 7 November.Figure 2. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 7 November 2022.For further information on the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, see the latest situation reports jointly published by the Ministry of Health and the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879.Partners in the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) have deployed staff to support the response activities in Uganda, primarily for case management, infection prevention and control and WASH, epidemiology and surveillance, laboratory, Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) and Safe and Dignified Burials (SDBs).  Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countriesThe Ministry of Health in the six neighboring countries (Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, and the United Republic of Tanzania), in-country and international partners, and WHO are supporting SUDV readiness actions. These include the activation of multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms for SUDV; refresher training of rapid response teams; refresher laboratory training; infection prevention and control at health care facilities; activation/strengthening of surveillance systems for SUDV; community engagement and risk communication; screenings at points of entry (PoE) and assessment and reinforcement of case management capacities, among other activities.Countries are requested to cascade the operational readiness activities to sub-national levels in high-risk districts/states to stop the introduction of SUDV into their communities. A new online preparedness assessment tool has been developed to measure key performance indicators to quantify and document the functionality of preparedness capacities in multiple high-risk districts in Uganda and six countries neighboring Uganda to facilitate real-time monitoring of the actual readiness status.In addition, external stakeholders in these six countries will jointly assess preparedness. The Joint Assessment Missions (JAM) will evaluate preparedness at the national level as well as in high-risk subnational-level districts/states. The JAM reports will provide a detailed picture of preparedness capacities in all pillars and in all subnational areas that are at risk.On 1 November 2022, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from high to very high at the national level, and from low to high at the regional level, while the risk remained low at the global level.The estimated very high risk at the national level is based on a combination of several factors including the lack of licensed medical countermeasures; the late detection of the SUDV outbreak and its spread to multiple districts (including to larger cities like Kampala, with a population of more than four million people and travel connections to many neighbouring countries); a highly mobile population with reports of some high-risk contacts and symptomatic cases traveling between districts using public transportation; despite significant case-finding efforts, there is a possibility that some contacts may have been missed; reported challenges with community engagement in affected districts; many cases have presented at various health facilities with suboptimal infection prevention and control (IPC) practices.The current outbreak is the first outbreak of Sudan ebolavirus in Uganda since 2012. Uganda has developed an increased capacity to respond to Ebola outbreaks over recent years and has a local capacity mobilized and organized with available resources to provide a robust response, but the system could be overwhelmed if the number of cases continues to rise and the outbreak spreads to other densely populated districts, as the country is simultaneously responding to multiple emergencies including outbreaks of anthrax, COVID-19, Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever, Rift Valley fever and yellow fever, as well as prevailing food insecurity.At the regional level, the risk has been assessed as high due to the lack of licensed vaccines and therapeutics, mass population movements within and across neighbouring countries, along with weak cross-border surveillance that further amplifies the risk of disease spread, and health systems that respond to multiple emergencies.The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.Successful SUDV outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including clinical management, community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, and strengthening laboratory capacity.Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g., hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision for implementation is required to reduce risks of health care facilities amplifying the outbreak. Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate WASH facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management) and community engagement and social mobilization are essential to prevent and mitigate ongoing transmission.Upon case identification, early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly reduce deaths from SUDV.Establishing active surveillance at points of entry is an essential component of the outbreak response to mitigate the risk of international spread due to the high cross-border mobility between Uganda and neighbouring countries.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.Citable reference: World Health Organization (10 November 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus – Uganda. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON423Situation at a glanceCholera is endemic in Malawi with seasonal outbreaks reported during the wet season. Since 1998, cholera cases have been reported in the country with significant morbidity and mortality in affected populations, especially in the southern region, which is low-lying, flat, and prone to flooding during the rainy season.The current outbreak, which started in March 2022 has affected 27 of 29 districts of Malawi and represents the largest outbreak reported in the country in the past ten years. The outbreak is taking place in the context of tropical storm Ana (January 2022) and Cyclone Gombe (March 2022) which caused floods leading to the displacement of a population with low pre-existing immunity that now lacks access to safe water, sanitation, and hygiene. Description of the casesOn 3 March 2022, the Ministry of Public Health of Malawi notified WHO of a cholera outbreak after laboratory confirmation of a cholera case in Machinga district hospital on 2 March 2022.Between 3 March through 31 October 2022, a cumulative total of 6056 cases including 183 deaths have been reported from 27 of 29 districts in Malawi (overall case fatality rate (CFR) 3.0%) with active transmission ongoing in 23 districts as of 31 October. Five districts account for 79% of the reported cases and 68% of the deaths: Nkhata Bay (1128 cases and 31 deaths), Nkhotakota (811 cases and 40 deaths), Rumphi (783 cases and 13 deaths), Karonga (683 cases and 14 deaths), and Blantyre (650 with 26 deaths).The outbreak originated in the Southern region of Malawi with cases reported in Nsanje and Machinga districts. Currently, the most affected districts in Malawi are in the Northern part of the country. The most affected age groups are 21-30 years, and males are disproportionately affected. Figure 1. Number of suspected and confirmed cholera cases (n=6056) and deaths (n=183) in Malawi by month, 1 January to 31 October 2022.Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population Figure 2. Geographical distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=6056) in Malawi, 1 January to 31 October 2022Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population Figure 3. Distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=6056) by age group and gender in Malawi, 1 January to 31 October 2022Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population Epidemiology of CholeraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to safe drinking water. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal within hours if untreated.The incubation period is between12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.A multi-sectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.Emergency response activities are being conducted by the Ministry of Health, WHO and other partners since the declaration of the outbreak in March 2022.Coordination and response: Surveillance:Health System Strengthening:Reactive Vaccination Campaigns: Cholera is endemic in Malawi with seasonal outbreaks occurring during the wet season. The first major outbreak occurred in 1998 and was widespread in the southern region, with 25 000 cases reported. The country reported its largest outbreak occurring from October 2001 to April 2002, which affected 26 of the 29 districts, with 33 546 cases and 968 deaths (CFR 3%). A more recent outbreak occurred in 2019 – 2020 with a total of 26 cases and one death.Since the beginning of 2022, 27 districts have reported cholera cases. The outbreak was largely confined to the south of the country, including the areas affected by the cyclones until after July 2022, when the outbreak spread to the North of the country resulting in a surge in cases. This upsurge in the number of cases is being reported during the country’s dry season when normally there is low or no transmission of cholera in Malawi. The upcoming rainy season in November poses the threat of further disease spread nationwide.There is a continued risk for further increases in the number of cases and international spread. Confirmed cases had been reported across the border in Mozambique during the initial period of the current outbreak. In late September, a cholera outbreak was declared in Lago district in Mozambique which borders Malawi (through Lake Malawi). Currently, the most affected districts in Malawi are in the Northern part of the country some of which are on the border with Tanzania and Zambia. There is significant cross-border movement in the region with bordering countries and beyond. Given the history of cross-border spread of cholera during this outbreak, WHO considers the risk of further spread of the disease very high at national and regional level. WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health communication messages are a key element for a successful campaign.OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of hospitalized patients to less than 1%.WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Malawi based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak is taking place in border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Malawi and its neighbouring countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing so that any spread across the border is quickly contained.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (7 November 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera – Malawi. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON419 Situation at a glanceBetween 1 January and 27 September 2022, a total of 25 932 confirmed dengue cases and 62 deaths (CFR 0.25%) were reported in Pakistan, with 74% of these cases reported in the month of September alone. The current surge in cases follows unprecedented flooding that began in mid-June 2022. With the current flood crisis affecting the national health system capacity and the growing humanitarian situation, there is a high risk of serious health impacts from dengue fever and other concurrent disease outbreaks. High population movement between Pakistan and bordering countries (in particular, Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran) means that the international transmission of dengue fever cannot be ruled out.Description of the outbreakDengue fever is endemic to Pakistan, which experiences year-round transmission with seasonal peaks. However, triggered by the worst flooding in the country’s history that began in mid-June, the number of reported dengue cases is significantly higher in 2022 (between January and September) as compared to the same period during the four previous years.Between 1 January to 27 September 2022, according to the National Institute of Health-Islamabad, a cumulative total of 25 932 confirmed dengue cases and 62 deaths have been reported nationally. Three-quarters (74%) of these cases were reported during the month of September alone. As of 22 September, the distribution of cases by province was available for 83% (n=21 777) of the total cases, of which 32% (n=6888) were reported from Sindh, 29% (n=6255) from Punjab (including the Islamabad Capital Territory), 25% (n=5506) from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and 14% (n=3128) from Balochistan (Figure 1).Figure 1. Distribution of confirmed dengue cases in Pakistan by province, 1 January to 22 September 2022.Epidemiology of dengueDengue is a viral infection transmitted by mosquitoes caused by four types of dengue virus (DENV 1, DENV 2, DENV 3, DENV 4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype, but not to other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk of severe dengue. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness, many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic.There is no specific treatment for dengue, however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%. The Ministry of Health, in collaboration with the Global Fund, is conducting vector surveillance and control activities as a part of Integrated Vector Management, including:The WHO is providing support including:Pakistan is experiencing an abnormal monsoon rainfall and unprecedented floods. One-third of the country and an estimated 33 million people have been impacted in 84 calamity declared districts. More than 2 million houses have been destroyed and an estimated 1460 health facilities have also reportedly been damaged. Some 7.9 million people are reportedly displaced, 12 900 people injured, and 1600 people have died. Heavy rains and floods have left millions of people without access to healthcare and medical treatment.With the current flood crisis affecting the national health system capacity, there is a high risk of serious health impacts from dengue fever.  Currently, there is a need for improved vector surveillance, enhanced laboratory capacity for better detection, sensitization of health care providers on case management (including warning signs of severe dengue) and improved surveillance of acute febrile illness to better define disease burden and seasonality patterns.Vector-borne epidemics – including dengue – after flooding is a well-known phenomenon, as the stagnant water provides favorable habitats for mosquitoes to breed. The lag time is usually around 3-4 weeks before the occurrence of dengue cases.Ongoing disease outbreaks in Pakistan, including acute watery diarrhoea, dengue, malaria, measles, polio, and COVID-19 are being further aggravated, particularly in internally displaced persons and refugee camps and where water and sanitation facilities have been damaged.Dengue fever is the most rapidly spreading mosquito-borne virus infection in the world. There is high population movement between Pakistan—in particular, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province— and bordering countries, especially the Islamic Republic of Iran and Afghanistan. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province is also home to 1 200 000 Afghani refugees, of which 800 000 live in districts officially notified as calamity hit by floods. The transmission of dengue fever from Pakistan to border countries cannot be ruled out.The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection and access to appropriate healthcare reduce mortality. Furthermore, the prevention and control of dengue depend on effective vector surveillance and control. WHO promotes the strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito activity and population, including Aedes spp. (the vector of dengue). IVM activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e. environmental management and source reduction, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals). Vector control activities can include covering, draining and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis. In addition, this may include chlorination of drinking water and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage in outdoor containers. Where indoor biting occurs, application of mosquito repellent lotion or sprays on the skin, use of household insecticide aerosol products, mosquito coils, or other insecticide vaporizers are recommended. Household fixtures such as window and door screens and air conditioning can also reduce bites. Since Aedes spp mosquitoes (the primary vector for transmission) are day biters with peak activity at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures such as the use of clothing to minimize skin exposure are recommended. During outdoor activities, mosquito repellents may be applied to exposed skin or to clothing. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people who sleep outside or during the day (e.g. infants, people confined to bed, and night workers) and at night to prevent mosquito bites. In addition, vector and human case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Key public health messages on reducing the risk of dengue transmission among the population are expected to continue to be provided. WHO does not recommend any general travel or trade restrictions to Pakistan based on the information available for this event.References: Citable reference: World Health Organization (13 October 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue - Pakistan. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON414Outbreak at a glanceDengue is endemic in Nepal. The country is experiencing a surge in cases that started from the week commencing 8 August to 26 August. Between January to 28 September 2022, a total of 28 109 confirmed and suspected dengue cases and 38 confirmed deaths due to dengue have been recorded, affecting all seven provinces. The causative serotype(s) is unknown. This represents the largest dengue outbreak in Nepal with regard to the cumulative number of cases reported nationwide per year.  Description of the outbreakBetween January and 28 September 2022, a total of 28 109 suspected and confirmed cases of dengue fever including 38 confirmed deaths (overall CFR 0.13%) have been reported from all seven provinces of Nepal, affecting all 77 districts in Nepal (Figure 1). Bagmati province which is the second-most populous province has reported the highest number of cases (78.2%) and deaths (68.4%).According to the Epidemiology and Disease Control Division (EDCD) of the Ministry of Health and Population, the highest number of new cases in 2022 have been reported in the districts of Kathmandu (n=9528; 33.8%), Lalitpur (n=6548; 23.2%), and Makwanpur (n=2776, 9.8%).Data on demographics was available for 23% of cases (n= 6734) of which 76% (5175/6734) were aged 15-59 years old, and 54% were males (n=3637). As of 28 September, 38 deaths have been verified, of which males and cases aged 15 – 59 years old each accounted for 55% (n=21) of reported deaths. Cases aged over 60 years old accounted for 39% (n=15) of reported deaths.Dengue cases have increased since July coinciding with the rainy season with majority of the cases reported during September (83.6%; n=23 514).Figure 1.  Number of Dengue cases reported from districts of Nepal from 1 January- 28 September 2022.Figure 2.   Number of dengue cases reported by months in Nepal from 1 January to 28 September 2022Epidemiology of the diseaseDengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) and it is possible to be infected by each. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness.There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.The Epidemiology and Diseases Control Division of the Ministry of Health and Population initiated the following actions to manage and coordinate the response:Nepal reported its first dengue case in a traveller returning from India in 2004. Since then, dengue has been endemic in Nepal. The country has expertise and experience in managing dengue, however, WHO considers the overall risk for the current dengue outbreak high at the national level due to the following reasons:This outbreak underscores the need for improved vector surveillance, enhanced laboratory capacity for better case detection, and improved surveillance of acute febrile illness in Nepal to effectively control the outbreak. There is frequent population movement across the Nepal-India land border. Dengue is endemic in many parts of India including northern Indian States, which share the border with Nepal.  Given the high incidence in Nepal, it is possible that dengue may spread across the border into India, although its consequences may depend on a number of factors such as the density of vectors, circulating serotypes, and level of public health response in the neighbouring Indian states. Nepal is a popular tourist destination, hence, spread through international travellers cannot be ruled out as Nepal is easing international travel restrictions imposed in response to COVID-19.The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection.  Although dengue does not spread from human to human, mosquitoes can become infected after biting infected individuals. This cycle, therefore, makes the infected mosquito capable of spreading the dengue virus among households and in the neighbourhood, leading to clusters of cases.The prevention and control of dengue depend on effective vector control. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including Aedes subspecies (the vector of dengue). IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e., environmental management and source reduction, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households.Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals, and construction sites in Kathmandu Valley). Vector control activities can include covering, draining, and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis. Space spraying with insecticide can be deployed as an emergency measure. Chlorination and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage in outdoor containers should also be considered.Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the application of repellents to exposed skin or clothing, and the wearing of long sleeves shirts and trousers. Indoors, additionally, protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning, can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of the day.There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection of warning signs and timely access to appropriate clinical management (including referral to an appropriate health care facility) reduce the risk for severe dengue complications and mortality. Vector and human case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated for the strengthening of a sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of dengue virus.WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to Nepal based on the information available for this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (10 October 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue fever - Nepal. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON412 Situation at a glanceOn 16 September 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Ghana declared the end of the Marburg Virus Disease (MVD) outbreak that affected the country’s Ashanti, Savannah and Western regions. In accordance with WHO recommendations the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Marburg infection) after the second negative test of the last confirmed case on 5 August 2022.Description of the outbreakBetween 28 June and 16 September 2022, the Ministry of Health of Ghana reported three confirmed cases of Marburg Virus Disease (MVD) including two deaths (CFR 67%). All three cases were from the same household.The Ministry of Health of Ghana declared the outbreak on 7 July 2022, after confirmation of Marburg virus on 1 July 2022 in a 26-year-old male (the index case) by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research (NMIMR). Blood samples were sent to Institute Pasteur, Dakar for confirmation. The onset of his symptoms was the 22 June with subsequent bleeding from the nose and mouth. The patient was admitted to a hospital on 26 June 2022 and died the following day.The second patient, a 14-month-old child, developed symptoms and was admitted on 17 July; he died on the third day of admission. The third patient, a 24-year-old female was admitted to a government-designated isolation center on 26 July 2022.   A total of 198 contacts were identified, monitored, and completed their recommended initial 21-day observation period which was then extended for another 21 days by the health authorities.On 16 September 2022, the MoH declared the end of the outbreak, 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period) after the second negative test of the last confirmed case on 5 August 2022.Epidemiology of the disease  Marburg Virus Disease (MVD) is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality ratios (CFR; 24-88%). In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other VHFs need to be excluded, including Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague. Human MVD infection can result from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies. Marburg virus spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with infected people's blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids, and surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids.
Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.In 2021, an outbreak of MVD was reported for the first time in West Africa in Guinea. Genetic sequencing results indicated that the Marburg virus (MARV) genomes from Ghana are related to the sequence from the 2021 outbreak and overall, group with sequences obtained from bats in Sierra Leone and an outbreak that occurred in Angola in 2004-2005.The current outbreak of MVD in Ghana has been declared over, with no new cases reported for 42-days after the second negative test of the last confirmed case on 5 August 2022. This was the first MVD outbreak reported in Ghana. Outbreaks of MVD are not frequent in West Africa. The most recent MVD outbreak was reported in the Republic of Guinea (one confirmed case) in August 2021. Countries in the African Region that have previously reported outbreaks of MVD include Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, South Africa, and Uganda.  The epidemiological investigation has not yet identified the source of this outbreak, which highlights the need to intensify community-based surveillance. The risk of this outbreak at its onset was assessed high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.Human-to-human transmission of Marburg virus is primarily associated with direct contact with blood and/or bodily fluids of infected persons, and health care related transmission of Marburg virus has been reported when appropriate infection control measures have not been implemented.Infection Prevention and Control at Health Care Facilities: Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Marburg virus disease should apply standard and transmission-based IPC precautions to avoid any exposure to blood and/or bodily fluids, as well as unprotected contact with the possibly contaminated environment. IPC precautions include:Integrated disease surveillance and response activities, including community-based surveillance, must continue to be strengthened within all affected health zones.Community Awareness for Infection prevention and control: Raising awareness of the risk factors for Marburg virus disease and the protective measures individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are the key measures to reduce human infections and deaths. Key public health communication messages include:Reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmissions, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys, and apes:Citable reference: World Health Organization (28 September 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Marburg Virus Disease - Ghana. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON409Outbreak at a glance                       On 8 July 2022, WHO was notified of a case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) from Tamanrasset province, southern Algeria. This represents the first cVDPV2 case identified in the country. Local public health authorities are conducting a field investigation, and an active search for additional AFP cases; a reactive Immunization campaign is also planned.Description of the outbreak On 8 July 2022, a case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Algeria was notified to WHO through the Global Polio Laboratory Network (GPLN). The case is a child under two years old from Tamanrasset province, southern Algeria, with onset of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) on 11 April 2022. Stool specimens tested positive for cVDPV2 by the Pasteur Institute of Algeria and were confirmed by Pasteur Institute of Paris. Genomic sequencing analysis indicates that the isolated virus is genetically linked to a virus previously isolated in Kano, Nigeria. The child had not received any polio vaccine doses and has no history of travel outside Tamanrasset province.This represents the first cVDPV2 case identified in Algeria, where, according to the 2021 WHO-UNICEF immunization coverage estimates, Pol3 (3rd dose of polio-containing vaccine) coverage was 91% and IPV1 (one dose of the inactivated polio vaccine) coverage was 94%.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPolio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis.The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in oral polio vaccine (OPV). OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) continues to affect different areas of the world, notably in the African Region.WHO considers there to be a continued high risk of international spread of cVDPV2, due to persisting suboptimal immunity, surveillance gaps, and large-scale population movements. The risk is magnified by decreased immunization rates related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The current isolate in Algeria is linked to a virus originating in Kano, Nigeria, demonstrating the potential for the international spread of this disease.It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within four weeks to 12 months of travel.Based on the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Algeria based on the information available for this current event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (13 September 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) - Algeria. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON406Outbreak at a glanceAs of 3 September 2022, a cluster of 11 cases of severe pneumonia, including four deaths, have been reported in San Miguel de Tucumán city, Tucuman Province, Argentina. Legionella spp. was isolated in the samples from four cases. Legionellosis is a pneumonia-like illness that varies in severity from mild febrile illness to a serious and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia. Cases were initially reported as being pneumonia of unknown cause. Legionella bacteria was identified as the causative organism on 3 September.All cases presented with bilateral pneumonia, fever, myalgia, abdominal pain, and dyspnea between 18 and 25 August 2022 and are epidemiologically linked to one health facility. Of the 11 cases, eight are health workers of the facility; three are patients of the health facility. Three of the four deaths were among health workers.Health authorities are coordinating cluster investigation activities, active case finding to identify additional cases, contact tracing and public health activities to limit further spread.Outbreak overviewOn 29 August 2022, WHO was notified by the Ministry of Health of Argentina of a report from the Ministry of Public Health of Tucumán Province, of a cluster of six cases of bilateral pneumonia without an etiological cause identified in San Miguel de Tucumán city, Tucuman Province, Argentina 1.  All six cases were linked to one private health facility in the city of San Miguel de Tucumán, with the onset of symptoms between 18 and 22 August 2022. The six cases included five health workers and one patient who was admitted to the clinic for an unrelated condition and then subsequently to the intensive care unit after developing pneumonia. In addition to bilateral pneumonia, all cases presented with fever, myalgia, abdominal pain, and dyspnea.On 1 September, three additional cases were identified through active case finding - all health workers from the same private health facility, aged 30 to 44 years - with similar signs and symptoms to the initial six cases identified 2. The onset of symptoms for these cases was between 20 and 25 August 2022. Between 2 and 3 September, two additional cases were identified, an 81-year-old male and a 64-year-old male, both with comorbidities, who were hospitalized and presented similar clinical presentation as the previous cases 3.As of 3 September 2022, 11 cases have been identified, four of whom have died (three health workers). Eight of the 11 reported cases are health workers of the same health facility. The median age of the cases is 45 years; seven are male. Ten cases had underlying conditions and/or risk factors for severe disease, including the four reported deaths. Four cases are still hospitalized as of 3 September. Contacts of the cases are under follow-up and, to date, none have developed symptoms.Laboratory resultsBlood, respiratory and tissues samples were obtained from the 11 cases. Preliminary tests conducted at the local Public Health Laboratory were negative for respiratory viruses, and other viral, bacterial, and fungal agents. On 31 August, samples from the initial six cases were sent to the National Reference Laboratory - the Administration of National Laboratories and Health Institutes (Administración Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud - ANLIS per its acronym in Spanish) - for additional testing 4 . As of 3 September 2022, negative results have been obtained for COVID-19 (RT-PCR), Influenza, detection of antibodies for Coxiella, urinary antigen for Legionella spp., panel of 12 respiratory viruses, hantavirus (Elisa IgM), histoplasma (RT-PCR), Yersinia pestis (PCR) and micro agglutination for leptospirosis.Further analyses of two bronchoalveolar lavage samples by highly sensitive total DNA sequencing (metagenomics) found readings compatible with Legionella spp. On 3 September 2022, ANLIS reported that amplification products of the 16S ribosomal gene for Legionella spp. from the two samples of bronchoalveolar lavage sequenced by metagenomics and analyzed by four different bioinformatic methods, produced results compatible with Legionella pneumophila. Confirmation of these results is expected upon completion of the sequencing processes. This laboratory result supports evidence compatible with Legionnaires’ disease. Blood culture and seroconversion tests continue to be conducted to complement the diagnosis of Legionella infection.  Epidemiology of LegionellosisLegionellosis is a generic term describing the pneumonic and non-pneumonic forms of infection with the Legionella species of bacteria. Legionellosis varies in severity from mild to serious and can sometimes be fatal.Legionnaires’ disease, the pneumonic form, has an incubation period of 2 to 10 days (but up to 16 days have been recorded in some outbreaks). It is an important cause of community- and hospital-acquired pneumonia; and although uncommon, Legionnaires may cause outbreaks of public health significance. Initially, symptoms are fever, mild cough, loss of appetite, headache, malaise and lethargy, with some patients also experiencing muscle pain, diarrhoea and confusion. The severity of Legionnaires’ disease ranges from a mild cough to rapidly fatal pneumonia. Untreated Legionnaires’ disease usually worsens during the first week.Mortality from Legionnaires’ disease depends on the severity of the disease, the use of antibiotic treatment, the setting where Legionella was acquired, and whether the patient has underlying conditions, including immunosuppression. The death rate may be as high as 40–80% in untreated immunosuppressed patients and can be reduced to 5–30% through appropriate case management, depending on the severity of the clinical signs and symptoms. Overall, the death rate is usually between 5–10%.In response to the detection of the cluster of bilateral pneumonia, health authorities in Tucuman Province coordinated cluster investigation activities including the follow-up of cases, search for the source(s) of infection, active case finding to identify additional cases, and contact tracing. Preliminary investigations indicated no secondary cases were identified.As Legionella spp. has been identified as the etiology of this outbreak, the following public health measures were implemented:With the support of national health authorities, environmental samples are being collected to define the source of contamination and urgently implement prevention and control measures. The health authorities are also implementing internal and external communication strategies for health professionals and the community.The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)/WHO is providing technical support for the outbreak investigation, including advice on sampling, environmental assessment, clinical management, and Infection and Prevention Control (IPC) measures.  Legionellosis varies in severity from a mild febrile illness to a serious and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia and is caused by exposure to Legionella species found in contaminated water and potting mixes. The most common form of transmission of Legionellosis is inhalation of contaminated aerosols from contaminated water sources. Sources that have been linked to both the transmission of Legionella via aerosols and outbreaks of Legionellosis include air conditioning cooling towers or evaporative condensers associated with air conditioning and industrial cooling, hot and cold water systems, humidifiers, and whirlpool spas. Infection can also occur by aspiration of contaminated water or ice, particularly in susceptible hospital patients. To date, there is no reported direct human-to-human transmission.Sporadic outbreaks of legionellosis pneumonia have been reported in Argentina before. There are robust surveillance activities being implemented in the affected health facility. Nonetheless, in the absence of an identified source of Legionella bacteria, the risk of developing Legionellosis for people working or hospitalized at the same health facility is currently moderate.Countries with cases of Legionellosis reported after travel to Argentina should notify their regional IHR focal point. WHO recommends the continuation of laboratory analyses, case identification and clinical care, contact tracing, outbreak investigation to identify the source(s), implementation of measures to prevent further infections and enhancement of Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures. IPC measures in health facilities have been enhanced during the COVID-19 pandemic and should be reinforced to prevent healthcare-associated transmission.  Precautions that are recommended for COVID-19 should continue to be followed.WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travelers. In case of symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their healthcare provider.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Argentina based on the current information available on this event. [1] Ministry of Public Health of the Government of Tucumán Official Communication. Available at: https://msptucuman.gov.ar/comunicado-oficial-18/[2] Ministry of Public Health of the Government of Tucumán Official Communication. Available at: https://msptucuman.gov.ar/el-ministerio-de-salud-informo-sobre-la-situacion-sanitaria-del-brote-de-neumonia-bilateral/[3] Ministry of Public Health of the Government of Tucumán Official Communication. Available at: https://msptucuman.gov.ar/comunicado-oficial-21/[4] Argentina Ministry of Health press release, “ANLIS-MALBRÁN analyzes samples from cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in Tucumán”. Available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/anlis-malbran-analiza-las-muestras-de-los-casos-de-neumonia-de-causa-desconocida-en-tucumanCitable reference: World Health Organization (5 September 2022). Disease Outbreak News;Legionellosis in Argentina . Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON407 Situation at a glance Yellow fever is endemic in the WHO African Region and was among the top five most frequently reported events in the region in 2019 and 2020. Twenty-seven countries in Africa have been classified as high-risk by the Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics (EYE) global strategy. From 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022, a total of 12 countries in the region have reported 184 confirmed cases and 274 probable cases, including 21 deaths, reflecting ongoing complex viral transmission. Risk factors for onward spread and amplification include low population immunity, population movements, viral transmission dynamics, and climate and ecological factors that have contributed to the spread of Aedes mosquitoes. Response measures, most notably reactive and preventive vaccination campaigns, are ongoing in the affected countries. Since the beginning of 2021, over 3.9 million people have been vaccinated through reactive vaccination campaigns in Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Ghana, and Kenya. Description of outbreaks In 2021, nine African countries - Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Nigeria, and Republic of the Congo - reported a total of 151 confirmed cases of yellow fever (for more details, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 23 December 20211). Of these nine countries, six continue to report confirmed cases of yellow fever with ongoing transmission in 2022, while Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria have reported probable cases2 and Gabon has not reported further cases since 2021.  In 2022, two additional countries, Kenya3 and Uganda4, have reported confirmed cases of yellow fever. From 1 January to 26 August 2022, a total of 33 confirmed cases of yellow fever were reported from eight African countries including Central African Republic (33%, 11 cases), Cameroon (24%, eight cases), Democratic Republic of Congo (13%, four cases), Kenya (9%, three cases), Chad (6%, two cases), Republic of the Congo (6%, two cases), Uganda (6%, two cases), and Ghana (3%, one case).  Ten countries - Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Niger, Nigeria, and Republic of the Congo - have also reported a total of 274 probable cases of yellow fever from 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022 (Table 1).  The majority of cases over the entire period were reported in the last quarter of 2021 (Figure 1), with Ghana reporting around 33% of all confirmed cases. Of 184 confirmed cases, 73% are aged 30 years and below, and the male-to-female ratio is 1.2. The case count and the number of outbreaks are anticipated to continue evolving as the Region enters the seasonal period when there is often an increase in cases notified. Figure 1. Probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever by week of symptom onset in countries reporting transmission in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022.  Figure 2. Distribution of probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022. Table 1. Probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever and deaths by country in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022. Epidemiology of yellow fever Yellow fever is an epidemic-prone, vaccine-preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when they occur the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent backache, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms clear after 3 to 4 days. A small proportion of cases progress to the toxic phase with systemic infection affecting the liver and kidneys. These individuals can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach.  Death can occur within 7 - 10 days in about half of cases with severe symptoms. Yellow fever is prevented by an effective vaccine, which is safe and affordable. A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to grant sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80-100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated. WHO is providing coordination and technical support to countries in conducting comprehensive investigations and outbreak response. Response measures by affected countries include: Strengthening surveillance and laboratory capacity WHO is supporting national authorities with field investigations, including training of health personnel on yellow fever case investigation, review of case investigation reports, and undertaking case classification sessions to ascertain the epidemiological classification of yellow fever cases; The Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics (EYE) strategy continues to support international shipment of yellow fever samples to regional reference laboratories since 2019, as well as ongoing laboratory testing and capacity building; Data management activities have been strengthened.   Vaccination Reactive vaccination campaigns (RVC) Preventive mass vaccination campaigns (PMVC)  According to the EYE strategy, twenty-seven countries in the African region are high-risk countries for yellow fever based on timing and intensity of yellow fever virus transmission, transmission potential and assessment of urban risk. Re-emergence of yellow fever was reported in 2020 with two outbreaks in West African countries with history of mass vaccination (in Guinea and Senegal, now contained). Since late 2021, the situation has intensified with 12 countries across the region reporting probable and confirmed cases.  WHO assesses the risk at regional level to be high. Current multi-country outbreaks and active virus circulation in West, Central and East Africa have resulted in increased morbidity and mortality, with continued risk of amplification and spread. The immunization coverage for yellow fever has been suboptimal in most of the affected countries and in specific populations. According to WHO and UNICEF estimates, in 2021, the routine childhood vaccination immunization coverage for yellow fever in the African region was 47%. This is much lower than the 80% threshold required to confer population immunity against yellow fever, indicating that a large population remains susceptible to yellow fever with a risk of continued transmission. Immunization coverage by countries reporting probable and confirmed cases in West, Central and East Africa are as follows: Cameroon (54%), Central African Republic (41%), Chad (45%), Republic of the Congo (67%), Côte d’Ivoire (65%), Democratic Republic of the Congo (56%), Gabon (53%), Ghana (94%), Kenya (7%), Niger (80%), and Nigeria (63%). Uganda plans to introduce yellow fever vaccine into routine immunization in August 2022. Further information on immunization coverage can be found here. Many countries in West, Central, and East Africa have been facing political instability and insecurity, in addition to concurrent outbreaks (including COVID-19, Ebola virus disease, cholera, meningitis, malaria, monkeypox, circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), chikungunya, leishmaniasis, plague, Lassa fever, etc.). These could contribute to delayed case investigation and hinder the surveillance and response efforts against yellow fever.  The risk at global level is assessed to be low as no exported cases of yellow fever linked to these 12 countries with probable or confirmed cases since January 2021 have been reported. Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended. Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means of prevention and control of yellow fever. Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and a single dose provides life-long protection. Completion of nation-wide population protection through vaccination will help avert the risk of future outbreaks. WHO supports national plans by countries reporting yellow fever outbreaks to introduce yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunization programme and complete preventive mass vaccination activities to rapidly boost population immunity.  Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites including the use of repellents and insecticide treated mosquito nets. The greatest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening. Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Returning travellers who are infected may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present. International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to the Region. WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers, aged nine months of age or older, going to areas determined by the WHO to be at risk for yellow fever transmission. For additional areas, the recommendation for vaccination of international travellers is subject to the assessment of the likelihood of exposure of each individual traveller.  Detailed information is available here. In accordance with the IHR (2005) third edition, the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever becomes valid 10 days after vaccination and the validity extends throughout the life of the person vaccinated. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.   [1] Case from Niger in 2021 was discarded upon case classification.[2] Case definitions: https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/vaccine-preventable-diseases-surveillance-standards-yellow-fever.[3] For more information, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 25 March 2022: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON361Citable reference: World Health Organization (2 September 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Yellow fever in East, West, and Central Africa . Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON405Outbreak at a glanceOn 21 August 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the Democratic Republic of the Congo announced that a new laboratory-confirmed case of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) had been detected in Beni health zone in the province of North Kivu. The case, a 46-year old woman who had co-morbidities, died on 15 August 2022 after being hospitalized for 23 days. Oropharyngeal secretion samples were taken after death on 15 August 2022 and tested positive for EVD. The body was buried before the EVD results were known. Field investigations are ongoing to identify hospital and community contacts. The last EVD outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was in Equateur province and declared over on 4 July 2022.Outbreak overviewOn 21 August 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the Democratic Republic of the Congo announced that a new laboratory-confirmed case of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) had been detected in a 46-year-old woman living in the city of Beni, in the province of North Kivu.The case was hospitalized and treated for 23 consecutive days—from 23 July to 15 August 2022—for symptoms thought to be related to her known co-morbidities, including cough, headache, polyarthralgia (joint pain), and physical asthenia (general fatigue). The patient died in hospital on 15 August 2022 and the body was returned to the family for burial. To date, there is no information on the Ebola vaccination status of the deceased case.On 15 August 2022, a sample of the oropharyngeal secretions was taken from the body and tested positive by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Institute for Biomedical Research (INRB), Beni. For quality control purposes, the sample was then tested at the Rodolphe Mérieux INRB Laboratory in Goma, which confirmed the results by RT-PCR on 16 August 2022. The body was returned to the family prior to receiving the laboratory results and subsequently buried on 16 August 2022.A total of 134 hospital contacts (60 health care personnel and 74 co-patients) have been identified. As of 24 August, nine family contacts have also been identified. There are ongoing investigations by response teams in the health facility where the patient was being treated, as well as in the community.The sequencing carried out at the Rodolphe Mérieux Laboratory of INRB in Goma confirmed this case is genetically linked to the 2018-2020 outbreak in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu provinces (Ebola Zaire strain) and not a new spillover event. (For more information on this outbreak, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 26 June 2020). Samples were also sent to INRB-Kinshasa for genomic sequencing.Epidemiology of Ebola virus diseaseEVD is a rare but severe, often fatal illness in humans. It is a viral haemorrhagic fever caused by the Ebola virus which is often fatal if untreated. The virus is transmitted to people through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as fruit bats (thought to be the natural hosts). It spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact with blood or body fluids of a person who is sick with or has died from Ebola, objects that have been contaminated with body fluids from a person sick with Ebola or the body of a person who died from Ebola.The average EVD case fatality ratio is around 50% and has varied from 25% to 90% in past outbreaks. Providing supportive care - rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids - and treatment of specific symptoms improves survival. The incubation period (time from infection to onset of symptoms) ranges from 2 to 21 days. A person infected with Ebola cannot spread the disease until they develop symptoms.The MoH of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in collaboration with WHO and other partners, has launched response measures to control the outbreak and prevent its spread.Investigations are underway, including identifying the source of contamination, contacts, contacts of contacts, defining the risks of exposure at the different departments of the hospital, and strengthening infection prevention and control (IPC) measures at the hospital.Building on local capacities at the health zone level, outbreak control interventions are being organized in the field and include case investigation, contact tracing, strengthening of surveillance system, isolation of suspected cases and providing care, laboratory confirmation, IPC measures in health facilities, as well as community engagement and social mobilization. EVD response interventions include:Preliminary information indicates that the first case was hospitalized at the health facility for 23 days without being diagnosed with EVD and died before EVD was confirmed by the laboratory. There is a risk of spread of EVD in the Province, and infection among health workers and co-patients in the health facility where the case was admitted.The current resurgence is not unexpected given that EVD is endemic in the country and Ebola virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region. The virus can persist in some bodily fluids of EVD survivors.  In a limited number of cases, secondary transmissions resulting from exposure to body fluids of EVD survivors have been documented. Relapses in EVD survivors have been reported.  Moreover, the frequent detection of outbreaks in recent years can also be explained by new developments in Ebola control, such as the use of GeneXpert machines, as well as the strengthening of surveillance and detection following successive epidemics and the scaling up of Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR).The re-emergence of EVD is a major public health concern in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and there are still gaps in the country's capacity to recover, prepare and respond to outbreaks.The Beni area is also affected by insecurity from armed groups. There have been more frequent protests against the security measures put in place by the authorities and against the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which further increases the risk of refusal of outbreak control measures and therefore the possibility of spread of the disease. The concurrent outbreaks in the country (COVID-19, cholera, measles, polio, yellow fever, monkeypox, etc) as well as the protracted humanitarian situation in the province of North Kivu, have put increasing pressure on the health system and the available resources.The risk at the national level is assessed as high. The risk at the regional and global levels is assessed as moderate and low, respectively. WHO is closely monitoring the situation and the risk assessment will be updated as new information becomes available.WHO recommends the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce transmission of Ebola virus disease in humans:Based on the current risk assessment and previous evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any travel and trade restrictions to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Citable reference: World Health Organization (25 August 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Ebola virus disease- Democratic Republic of the Congo. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON404 Outbreak at a glanceAs of 8 August, the United Republic of Tanzania has reported 20 cases of leptospirosis in two districts in Lindi Region, including three deaths. Of these, 15 cases have been laboratory-confirmed. The majority of cases are men, and all are reported to be farmers, with occupational exposure as the likely source of infection. No new cases have been reported since 15 July. Field investigations and active case finding are ongoing to identify any new or missed cases.Cases of leptospirosis are not unexpected in the United Republic of Tanzania, although reports of outbreaks are rare. Cases tend to have a seasonal distribution, increasing with elevated rainfall or temperature. Transmission usually occurs through direct exposure to infected animal urine or through environmental exposure.This Disease Outbreak News summarizes the epidemiology of the outbreak, provides an overview of the public health response to this event, and WHO advice to the general public and healthcare workers in affected areas.Description of the outbreakOn 14 July 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the United Republic of Tanzania notified WHO of 13 cases of an undiagnosed disease, later diagnosed as leptospirosis. The first two cases presented to a Health Centre located in Ruangwa District, Lindi Region on 5 and 7 July, with symptoms of fever, bleeding from the nose, headache and general body weakness. Samples tested negative for Ebola virus disease, Marburg virus disease, Influenza, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, yellow fever, Chikungunya, West Nile virus and Rift Valley fever at the National Public Health Laboratory and the Tanzania Veterinary Laboratory Agency, and subsequently tested positive for leptospirosis at the Sokoine University of Agriculture reference laboratory.As of 8 August, a total of 20 cases of leptospirosis and three deaths had been reported from two districts including Ruangwa (18 cases) and Kilwa (two cases) in Lindi Region (Figure 1). Of these, 15 cases have been laboratory-confirmed, including one death (case fatality rate 6.7%). Of the remaining five cases, three cases, including one death, tested negative for leptospirosis while samples were not taken for two cases, of which one died.The cases ranged from 18 to 77 years of age (median age 45 years) and the majority (n=15; 75%) were between 31 and 60 years. Most of the cases (n=15, 75%) were males, who were farmers by occupation and were detected in a temporary camp for agricultural activities.Cases who reported onset of symptoms from 30 June to 3 July were identified in the community during active case finding. The majority of cases reported onset of symptoms between 2 and 6 July, and the most recent cases reported onset of symptoms on 7 July. No new cases have been reported since 15 July (Figure 2). Field investigations and active case finding are ongoing to identify any new or missed cases.Figure 1: Geographic distribution of suspected cases of leptospirosis in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 15 July 2022 Figure 2: Suspected cases of leptospirosis by onset of symptoms, as of 15 July 2022Source: United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Health.Epidemiology of the diseaseLeptospirosis is a zoonotic disease caused by the Leptospira genus of bacteria, and a worldwide public health problem attributed to climatic and environmental conditions. Humans become infected through contact with urine (or other body fluids, except saliva) from infected animals, such as rodents, dogs, pigs, cattle, horses, racoons, and wild animals, or contact with water, soil, or food contaminated with the urine of infected animals. Human-to-human transmission occurs only very rarely. The incubation period is usually 7–10 days, with a range of 2–30 days.Clinical features of leptospirosis include fever, headache, myalgia (particularly in the calf muscle), conjunctival suffusion, jaundice, and general malaise. As these symptoms are similar to other infectious diseases, it is important to correctly diagnose early after the onset of symptoms to treat patients and prevent severe illness. Severe cases include renal and cardiac failure as well as pulmonary hemorrhages and can mimic other epidemic diseases of international importance.Outbreaks of leptospirosis are rare, with a seasonal distribution, increasing with increased rainfall or higher temperature, and are usually caused by exposure to contaminated water, such as floodwaters or may be associated with changes in human behaviour, animal or sewage contamination of water, changes in animal reservoir density, or following natural disasters. WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level as moderate. Although the exact source of the outbreak remains unidentified, it is likely linked to farming activities. The affected areas attract farmers from other locations who make temporary settlements while farming and the area has a seasonal influx of farmers, inferring that many other people can be exposed to the same source of contamination and the number of cases may increase.In addition, the affected areas have limited basic services including water supply, sanitation and hygiene, and health care services. It is therefore anticipated that IPC capacities at the community level would be weak. Moreover, the country’s capacity to respond to this outbreak might become overwhelmed, if the number of cases and affected areas increase in addition to other ongoing health threats. Leptospirosis has been previously reported in the United Republic of Tanzania (2014, in Kigoma Region) and is a recognized public health risk. However, the incidence in different regions is not well known and surveillance capacity is limited.The risk of disease spread both at regional and global levels is considered Low.The control of leptospirosis is complicated and will depend on the local conditions. Control can be achieved by controlling the disease reservoir. Preventive measures must be based on a knowledge of the groups at particular risk of infection and the local epidemiological factors. Prevention and control should be targeted at: (a) the infection source; (b) the route of transmission between the infection source and the human host; or (c) infection or disease in the human host.Transmission can therefore be prevented by:When an outbreak occurs, both health care workers and the general public need to be rapidly informed of the situation and of the ways in which the disease may be prevented. Widespread community education can greatly assist in the identification of risk factors, the prevention of illness, and reducing the duration of illness and its severity through the early recognition of suspicious symptoms and self-referral for evaluation and treatment.The general public should be provided with information on the clinical signs of leptospirosis, on the risk of exposure, and on the importance of seeking medical care as soon as possible as the disease responds to antibiotics. Information should also be given on methods of prevention, such as people should avoid drinking or submerging in water that may be contaminated, and not wash clothes in potentially contaminated water if any open wounds are present.Health care providers should be given information to help them recognize a febrile illness, possibly due to leptospirosis, and on suitable treatments for the disease. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed leptospirosis should apply standard and transmission-based IPC precautions. In addition, information on the symptoms of leptospirosis, risk factors, diagnostic testing and therapeutic strategies should be regularly disseminated to health care workers through various channels.Surveillance activities including active case search should be reinforced in all affected areas and surroundings. The One Health approach should also be strengthened with surveillance activities reinforced not only with regard to human health but also animal and environmental health.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel or trade to the United Republic of Tanzania based on the current situation. Citable reference: World Health Organization (12 August 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Leptospirosis in  the United Republic of Tanzania . Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON403 Outbreak at a glanceDengue is endemic in Bangladesh. As compared to the previous four years (2018 to 2021), the Rohingya refugee/Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals (FDMN) [1] camps in Cox’s Bazar district, are experiencing an acute surge in dengue cases, that started at the end of May 2022 (epi week 22). As of 24 July (end of epi week 29), a total of 7687 confirmed cases and 6 deaths have been reported, with 93% (7178) of the cumulative number of cases being reported since the start of the surge at the end of May 2022 (Figure 1). A similar surge has not been observed in the larger Cox’s Bazar district outside of the Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps nor at the national level with case numbers and trends within expected levels of incidence for the same period. As dengue is recurrent in this part of the country, the population may be at risk of secondary infection, which puts them at higher risk for severe disease.Description of the outbreakFrom 1 January to 24 July 2022, a total of 7687 cases of dengue, confirmed by rapid diagnostic test (RDT), and six deaths (case fatality rate, 0.08%) have been reported from the  Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps in Cox’s Bazar district, Ukhia Upazila and Teknaf Upazila (sub-districts), with the former sub-district being the most affected of the two. An acute surge of cases began during the week commencing 23 May (epi week 22), and peaked the week ending 26 June (epi week 25), with 93% (7178) of the cumulative number of cases being reported between 23 May and 24 July. A decreasing trend in reported dengue cases was observed following the peak when 1291 cases were reported in epi week 25; however case numbers remain high despite the decline: epi week 26 (1241), epi week 27 (1152), epi week 28 (962), epi week 29 (1000).Cases of reported dengue in  Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps are significantly higher as compared to similar periods over the past four years; 2018 (4 cases), 2019 (7 cases), 2020 (3 cases), and 2021 (1530 cases and 3 deaths with a surge from October to December) (Figure 1).  However, at a national level and in the larger Cox’s Bazar district, case numbers have been within expected endemic levels of incidence; by comparison to the dengue case from the camps, the larger Cox’s Bazar district reported approximately 121 cases from 1 January to the end of June (epi week 27).  Camps located in Ukhia Upazila are predominantly affected by the outbreak. Camp 3 accounted for over 50% of all reported cases and Camps 4 and 1W each account for less than 10% of cases as of 24 July 2022. More than two-thirds of cases (67%) were among persons 15 years and older with males accounting for 60% of cases. The majority of cases (81%) were hemodynamically stable – not showing any warning signs for severe dengue syndrome (such as dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or Dengue Shock syndrome (DSS)) nor having any coexisting conditions – while approximately 15% of cases were mild and required observation and admission to primary health facilities. Severe dengue with signs of DHF and DSS was observed in 0.3% of cases and required admission to Cox’s Bazar District Hospital located within the camp. Among patients admitted to the hospital, 1% required blood transfusion. Previous dengue infection was reported in 1% of current cases.Serotyping results from 10 samples processed at the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) reference laboratory in the capital Dhaka identified DENV-3 (5 samples), DENV-2 (3 samples). Two samples had inconclusive results.Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh with recurrent outbreaks. The Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps in Cox’s Bazar district previously experienced an acute dengue outbreak from October to December 2021 during which 1530 cases, including 3 deaths, were reported. Case numbers began to decline at the beginning of 2022, and by the end of February, the event was under control until the resurgence of cases in May 2022.Figure 1. RDT-confirmed cases of dengue fever in Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps, Cox’s Bazar District, Bangladesh by notification date, 1 January 2018 to 24 July 2022** Due to relatively low case numbers in 2018 to 2020, the curves for these years do not appear visible in the chart.Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) and it is possible to be infected by each. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness.There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.Occasional cases acquired overseas have been reported among individuals returning from an area with active dengue transmission, however, there is no conclusive evidence that there have been cases of dengue imported to Bangladesh.In August 2017, approximately 700,000 Rohingya nationals fled from Myanmar to Cox’s Bazar district, joining more than 200,000 Rohingya nationals already present, and settling into informal makeshift camps, marked by inadequate access to potable water or quality sanitation and challenging living conditions. The speed and magnitude of the influx exerted pressure on existing resources, strained healthcare services, water, and other social amenities. As a result, there have been high levels of global acute malnutrition (GAM) in children under five years; persistent transmission of acute watery diarrhoea (AWD); recurrent cholera epidemics that are transitioning into an endemic state; persistent diphtheria transmission since 2017; and occasional upsurges of measles, varicella, and skin infections.Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality.  In Bangladesh, hospital capacity is limited and further increases in severe dengue cases may pose considerable challenges in case management. The Severe Acute Respiratory Infections Treatment Centres (SARI ITC) bed occupancy for COVID-19 admissions is 26% as of 26 June. As hospitals become burdened with people affected by the COVID-19 virus, the increase in hospitalized dengue cases may put undue strain on healthcare capacities.Currently, the district of Cox’s Bazar can detect dengue using RDTs done in approximately 50 sentinel sites distributed across the 33 camps located in Ukhia and Teknaf Upazilas (sub-districts). There is currently no capacity for dengue virus serotyping at Cox’s Bazar Medical College Laboratory.Cox’s Bazar previously experienced an acute dengue outbreak from October to December 2021. The current surge in dengue cases could be considered a continuation of last year’s transmission. As dengue is recurrent in this part of the country, the population may be at risk of a secondary infection that may lead to serious complications if not treated promptly and adequately.Key challenges experienced during last year’s dengue upsurge included delays in the international procurement process for dengue RDT kits, the long process necessary for undertaking dengue virus serotype in the capital Dhaka given such capacity is not available in Cox’s Bazar, and weak vector surveillance and control.In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, other ongoing health events such as cholera/AWD (persistent low level of transmission) and diphtheria (persistent low level of transmission since September 2021) may pose additional challenges in response measures by competing for resources. Population movement is now more pronounced in Bangladesh with the relaxation of COVID19-related movement restrictions. Cox’s Bazar does not have a direct international point of entry. However, it is close to the seaport in Chattogram and has a domestic airport that receives a large volume of local and international tourists and international humanitarian workers. These factors increase the possibility of international dengue introduction and spread.The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. Although dengue does not spread from human to human, Aedes species mosquitoes can become infected after biting dengue-infected individuals, thus creating a cycle of transmission capable of spreading dengue and leading to clusters of cases.Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors. IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adult mosquitoes, including:Indoor space spraying (fogging) is another approach for rapid containment of a dengue outbreak but may be challenging to deliver in densely populated areas within camps. Larvicidal prevention measures recommended by MOHFW and WHO are considered more impactful in breaking transmission compared to the targeting of adult mosquitoes with fogging and fumigation.Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the topical application of repellents to exposed skin or treatment of clothing, and the use of long sleeves shirts and pants. Indoor protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning, can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day.Entomological surveillance should be undertaken to assess the breeding potential of Aedes mosquitoes in containers as well as conducting insecticide resistance testing for vector control intervention.Rapid detection of severe dengue cases and timely referrals to tertiary hospitals can reduce mortality. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated to the strengthening of sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of the dengue virus.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (2 August 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue in Rohingya refugee/Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals (FDMN) camps in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON401 Outbreak at a glanceCholera is endemic in Somalia with recurrent outbreaks reported since 2017. Between 1 January to 10 July 2022, a cumulative number of 7796 cases of cholera including 37 associated deaths (case fatality ratio 0.5%) have been reported from 25 drought-affected districts.The current cholera outbreak is taking place in the context of other ongoing outbreaks, high rates of malnutrition, and the escalating drought, all of which are exacerbating the fragility of Somalia’s humanitarian situation and have led to large displacement of people, placing additional pressure on an already over-burdened and underperforming healthcare system. Currently, the country has limited capacity to respond to the outbreak, increasing the risk of serious public health impact.Description of the outbreakFrom 1 January to 10 July 2022, according to the Ministry of Health Somalia (MOH), a cumulative number of 7796 cases of cholera including 37 associated deaths (CFR: 0.5%) have been reported from 25 drought-affected districts in Banadir region, South-West state and Hirshabelle state (Table-1). The districts reporting the highest number of cases include Baidoa (2033), Daynile (1080), Jowhar (825) and Afgoi (681). In addition to being the drought-affected districts, many of these districts also host Internally Displaced Populations (IDP) in camps resulting from three decades of conflict and the escalating drought situation.Over half of the cases (53.5%) were among children below two years of age, with males and females equally affected. Severe dehydration was reported in 27% of cases.  None of the cases reported having received Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV).  OCV campaigns were carried out in Somalia in 2017, 2018 and 2019.As of 10 July, a total of 677 stool samples were collected and analyzed (by culture) by the National Public Health laboratory in Mogadishu. Of these, 145 samples (21.4%) tested positive for Vibrio cholerae Ogawa 01.The number of cases reported in the first six months of 2022 has exceeded the number of cases reported in 2021 in the same drought affected districts, when a total of 6205 acute watery diarrhoea (AWD)/suspected cholera cases including 39 deaths (CFR:0.63%) were reported. In 2021, the outbreak started following flash floods.Table-1: Number of cholera cases, deaths, case fatality ratios and attack rates by districts in Somalia; from 1 January to 10 July 2022(epidemiological week 1-27, 2022)Figure: 1- Geographic distribution of cholera cases in Somalia (%) from 1 January to 10 July 2022Figure 2:  Number of suspected cholera cases in Somalia reported from 1 January 2021 through 10 July 2022Epidemiology of choleraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Among people who develop symptoms, the majority have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).Cholera can be endemic or epidemic. A cholera-endemic area is an area where confirmed cholera cases were detected during the last three years with evidence of local transmission (cases are not imported from elsewhere). A cholera epidemic can occur in both endemic countries and in non-endemic countries. Uninfected dead bodies have never been reported as the source of epidemics.The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations to inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, improving access to clean water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion, rapid access to treatment, risk communication and community engagement and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.Emergency response activities are being conducted by the MOH, WHO and other partners. These measures include:In 2017, more than 78 000 suspected cholera cases including 1159 deaths (CFR 1.5%) were reported in Somalia. Transmission has continued since, with 6761 suspected cholera cases and 45 deaths (CFR 0.67%) reported in 2018; 3100 cases and four deaths (CFR 0.13%) reported in 2019; 6414 cases and 44 deaths (CFR 0.69%) reported in 2020 and 6205 AWD/cholera cases and 39 deaths (CFR 0.63%) reported in 2021.The current cholera outbreak in Somalia is taking place in the context of other ongoing outbreaks (including COVID-19, measles), as well as the escalating drought that has affected seven million people and displaced      805 000 people to camps according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  (UNOCHA), putting pressure on an already overstretched health-care system with limited primary healthcare services. The Somalia Food Security and Nutrition Unit has reported that multiple areas face a risk of famine during the current drought and under escalating food prices with more than 45% of the population classified as Integrated Food Insecurity Phase Classification (IPC) 3 (Crisis) [1] and more. The drought has further stretched response capacity in Somalia.Additionally, the current cholera outbreak has been confirmed in 25 drought affected districts, which hosts displaced communities who have limited access to safe water, proper sanitation and access to food.Although there is currently no evidence of cross-border spread of the outbreak, international spread cannot be ruled out given the escalating drought conditions across the Horn of Africa, which has led to repeated displacement and extensive cross-border population movement between Somalia and nearby countries especially Ethiopia, Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen. These countries are also experiencing similar conditions (limited access to safe water, proper sanitation and food) that may facilitate the transmission of diarrheal disease, especially affecting displaced communitiesWHO recommends strengthening of disease surveillance systems, and proper and timely case management of cholera cases. Oral cholera vaccines should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection, prevention and control in healthcare facilities, with hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities, are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Key public health communication messages should be provided to the population.Specifically, in Somalia, despite ongoing response activities there is an urgent need to reinforce the following actions in drought affected districts:WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions for Somalia based on the currently available information.Citable reference: World Health Organization (20 July 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera in Somalia. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON398_1 This Disease Outbreak News on the multi-country monkeypox outbreak is an update to the previously published editions and provides an update on the epidemiological situation, further information on the use of therapeutics, as well as on the outcomes of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the multi-country monkeypox outbreak held on 23 June. Since 1 January and as of 22 June 2022, 3413 laboratory confirmed cases and one death have been reported to WHO from 50 countries/territories in five WHO Regions.     Since the previous Disease Outbreak News of 17 June was published, 1310 new cases have been reported and eight new countries have reported cases.   The majority of laboratory confirmed cases (2933/3413; 86%) were reported from the WHO European Region. Other regions reporting cases include: the African Region (73/3413, 2%), Region of the Americas (381/3413, 11%), Eastern Mediterranean Region (15/3413, <1%) and Western Pacific Region (11/3413, <1%).  One death was reported in Nigeria in the second quarter of 2022.  The case count is expected to change as more information becomes available daily and data are verified under the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR 2005) (Table 1).   Figure 1. Geographic distribution of confirmed cases of monkeypox reported to or identified by WHO from official public sources, between 1 January and 22 June 2022, 17:00 CEST, (n=3413)Table 1. Confirmed cases of monkeypox by WHO region and country from 1 January 2022 to 22 June 2022, 17:00 CEST WHO continues to closely monitor the situation, and support international coordination and information sharing with Member States and partners. Clinical and public health incident response have been activated by Member States to coordinate comprehensive case finding, contact tracing, laboratory investigation, isolation, clinical management and implementation of infection and prevention and control measures. Genomic sequencing of viral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of the monkeypox virus found in the current outbreak is ongoing, where available; preliminary data from polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays indicate that the monkeypox virus genes detected belong to the West African clade.   Vaccines WHO has strongly encouraged Member States to consider the context of the current multi-country outbreak of monkeypox and convene their national immunization technical advisory groups (NITAGs) to review the evidence and develop policy recommendations for the use of vaccines as relevant to the national context. All decisions around immunization with smallpox or monkeypox vaccines (pre-emptive or post-exposure) should be by shared clinical decision-making, based on a joint assessment of risks and benefits, between a health care provider and prospective vaccinee, on a case-by-case basis. Member States using vaccines against monkeypox are encouraged to do so within a framework of collaborative clinical studies using standardized design methods and data collection tools for clinical and outcome data to rapidly increase evidence generation, especially on vaccine effectiveness and safety. Tecorivimat is an antiviral drug with recent regulatory approval from the European Medicines Agency for orthopovirus-associated infections, including monkeypox, based on animal models and data for safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in humans. Therefore, it is expected that reliable and interpretable results on its safety and efficacy will soon become available. The International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee met on 23 June 2022 regarding the multi-country monkeypox outbreak to advise the WHO Director-General on whether it constituted a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). The committee advised the WHO Director-General that the outbreak should not constitute a PHEIC at this stage, however, the Committee acknowledged the emergency nature of the event and that controlling the further spread of this outbreak requires intense response efforts. They advised that the event should be closely monitored and reviewed after a few weeks, when additional information about the current unknowns (e.g., incubation period, the role of sexual transmission, etc.) become available, to determine if significant changes have occurred that may warrant a reconsideration of their advice.  The Committee advised the WHO Director-General that Member States should collaborate with each other and with WHO in providing the required assistance through bilateral, regional or multilateral channels, and should follow the guidance provided by WHO (see the list of documents at the bottom of the page). The Director-General accepted the advice of the Committee, adding in a statement that the situation requires collective attention and coordinated action now to stop the further spread, using public health measures including surveillance, contact-tracing, isolation and care of patients, and ensuring health tools like vaccines and treatments are available to at-risk populations and shared fairly.The overall risk is assessed as moderate at global level considering this is the first time that cases and clusters are reported concurrently in five WHO Regions. At the regional level, the risk is considered to be high in the European Region due to its report of a geographically widespread outbreak involving several newly-affected countries, as well as a somewhat atypical clinical presentation of cases. In other WHO Regions, the risk is considered moderate with consideration for epidemiological patterns, possible risk of importation of cases and capacities to detect cases and respond to the outbreak.  In newly-affected countries, this is the first time that cases have mainly, but not exclusively, been confirmed among men who have had recent sexual contact with a new or multiple male* partners.  The unexpected appearance of monkeypox and the wide geographic spread of cases indicate that the monkeypox virus might have been circulating below levels detectable by the surveillance systems and sustained human-to-human transmission might have been undetected for a period of time. Routes of monkeypox virus transmission include human-to-human via direct contact with infectious skin or mucocutaneous lesions, respiratory droplets (and possibly short-range aerosols) or indirect contact from contaminated objects or materials, also described as fomite transmission. Vertical transmission (mother-to-child) has also been documented.  While it is known that close physical contact can lead to transmission, it is unclear whether sexual transmission via semen/vaginal fluids occurs, research is currently underway to understand this. In addition, the likelihood of sustained community transmission cannot be ruled out and the extent to which pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic infection may occur as the infectious period is unknown, as well as the further spread of monkeypox virus among persons with multiple sexual partners in interconnected networks and the likely role of mass gatherings.  The clinical presentation of monkeypox cases associated with this outbreak has been atypical as compared to previously documented reports: many cases in newly-affected areas are not presenting with the classically described clinical picture for monkeypox (fever, swollen lymph nodes, followed by centrifugal rash).Atypical features described include:The actual number of cases is likely to be underestimated, in part due to the lack of early clinical recognition of an infection previously known in only a handful of countries, and limited enhanced surveillance mechanisms in many countries for a disease previously ‘unknown’ to most health systems. Health care-associated infections cannot be ruled out (although unproven to date in the current outbreak). There is a potential for increased health impact with wider dissemination in vulnerable groups as the mortality was previously reported as higher among children and young adults, and immunocompromised individuals, including people living with uncontrolled HIV infection, are especially at risk of severe disease. The risk is also represented by the difficulties involved in widespread lack of availability of laboratory diagnostics, antivirals and vaccines and as well as in ensuring adequate biosafety and biosecurity in diagnostic, clinical and referral laboratories everywhere that cases have occurred. A large part of the population is vulnerable to monkeypox virus, as smallpox vaccination, which is expected to provide some protection against monkeypox has been discontinued since the 1980s. Only a relatively small number of military, frontline health professionals and laboratory workers have been vaccinated against smallpox in recent years. A third-generation vaccine MVA received authorization of use by the European Medicines Agency for smallpox. The authorization of use provided by Health Canada and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) includes an indication for the prevention of monkeypox. An antiviral agent, tecovirimat, has been approved by the European Medicines Agency, Health Canada, and the United States FDA for the treatment of smallpox. It is also approved for use in the European Union for the treatment of monkeypox.  All countries should be on the alert for signals related to patients presenting with a rash that progresses in sequential stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs, at the same stage of development over all affected areas of the body – that may be associated with fever, enlarged lymph nodes, back pain, and muscle aches.In addition, during this current outbreak, many individuals are presenting with atypical symptoms which includes a localized rash that may include as little as one lesion. The appearance of lesions may be asynchronous, and persons may have primarily or exclusively peri-genital and/or peri-anal distribution associated with local, painful swollen lymph nodes. Some patients may also present with sexually transmitted infections and should be tested and treated appropriately. These individuals may present to various community and health care settings including, but not limited to, primary and secondary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynaecology, emergency departments, surgical specialties and dermatology clinics.  Clinical management and Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) in health care and community settings Caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox requires early recognition through screening protocols adapted to local settings, prompt, isolation and rapid implementation of appropriate IPC measures (standard and transmission-based precautions, including the addition of respirator use for health workers caring for patients with suspected /or monkeypox, and an emphasis on safe handling of linen and management of the environment), testing to confirm diagnosis, symptomatic management of patients with mild or uncomplicated monkeypox and monitoring for and treatment of complications and life-threatening conditions such as progression of skin lesions, secondary bacterial infection of skin lesions, ocular lesions, and rarely, severe dehydration, severe pneumonia or sepsis. Patients with less severe monkeypox who isolate at home require careful assessment of the ability to safely isolate and maintain required IPC precautions in their home to prevent transmission to other household and community members. To enable reliable evaluations of interventions, randomized trials using CORE protocols are the preferable approach. Unless there are compelling reasons not to do so, every effort should be made to implement randomized trial designs. It is feasible to conduct placebo-controlled studies, especially in low-risk individuals. Harmonised data collection for safety and clinical outcomes using WHO's Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox, would represent a desirable minimum dataset in the context of an outbreak, including the current event.Precautions (isolation and IPC measures) should remain in place until lesions have crusted, scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath.   Laboratory testing and sample management  Any individual meeting the definition for a suspected case should be offered testing. The decision to test should be based on both clinical and epidemiological factors, linked to an assessment of the likelihood of infection. Due to the range of conditions that cause skin rashes and because clinical presentation may more often be atypical in this outbreak, it can be challenging to differentiate monkeypox solely based on the clinical presentation. Risk communication and community engagement Communicating monkeypox-related risks and engaging at-risk and affected communities, community leaders, civil society organizations, and health care providers, including those at sexual health clinics, on prevention, detection and care, is essential for preventing further secondary cases and effective management of the current outbreak.For further information on risk communication for contacts, suspected and confirmed cases, and individuals who develop symptoms suggestive of monkeypox, please see the Disease Outbreak News published 17 June 2022.Anyone caring for a person infected with monkeypox should use appropriate personal protective measures. As a precaution, WHO suggests the use of condoms consistently during sexual activity (receptive and insertive oral/anal/vaginal) for 12 weeks post-recovery to reduce the potential transmission of monkeypox for which the risk is currently not known.  Misinformation: The public is reminded that rumors and incorrect information continue to circulate on social media and other platforms regarding the current outbreak, and that it is important to check facts with credible sources such as WHO or national health authorities.One Health  Various wild mammals have been identified as susceptible to monkeypox virus in areas that have previously reported monkeypox. These include rope squirrels, tree squirrels, Gambian pouched rats, dormice, non-human primates, among others. Some species may have asymptomatic infection. Other species, such as monkeys and great apes, show skin rashes typical of those found in humans. Thus far, there is no documented evidence of domestic animals or livestock being affected by monkeypox virus. There is also no documented evidence of human-to-animal transmission of monkeypox. However, this remains a hypothetical risk. Therefore, appropriate measures should be taken, such as:International travel and points of entry  Based on available information at this time, WHO does not recommend that States Parties adopt any measures that restrict international traffic for either incoming or outgoing travellers.  Public health officials should work with travel operators and public health counterparts in other locations to contact passengers and others who may have had contact with an infectious person while travelling. Health promotion and risk communication materials should be available at points of entry, including information on how to identify signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox; on the precautionary measures recommended to prevent its spread; and on how to seek medical care at the place of destination when needed.  WHO urges all Member States, health authorities at all levels, clinicians, health and social sector partners, and academic, research and commercial partners to respond quickly to contain local spread and, by extension, the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox. Rapid action must be taken before the virus can be allowed to establish itself as a human pathogen with efficient person-to-person transmission in areas that have previously reported monkeypox, as well as in newly affected areas.  Data management  Risk communication and community engagement  Laboratory and genomic studies  Disease Outbreak News  Training and Education Other Resources Citable reference: World Health Organization (27 June 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Multi-country monkeypox outbreak in non-endemic countries: Update. Available at:  https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON396* The sentence was edited for clarification on the sexual partners.Outbreak at a glance:On 15 May 2022, a case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) was reported in Mozambique through the Global Polio Laboratory Network (GPLN). Results of the genomic sequencing analysis indicate that the current WPV1 isolate is genetically linked to a strain detected in Pakistan in 2019 and similar to a case of WPV1 reported in Malawi in February 2022.As part of response measures following the confirmation of the case in Malawi, two rounds of bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine (bOPV) campaigns have been conducted in the country, with more than 4.5 million children vaccinated.The risk of international spread, particularly across the South East region of Africa remains high, due to persisting sub-optimal immunity and surveillance gaps, and large-scale population movements.Description of the outbreak:On 15 May 2022, the GPLN reported the confirmation of a case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) in Mozambique. The case is a 12-year-old female with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), with onset of paralysis on 25 March, from Changara district, Tête province bordering Zimbabwe and Malawi. Two stool specimens were collected for testing on 1 April and 2 April. On 14 May, the samples were confirmed to be WPV1 by National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa. The child had previously received three doses of bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine(bOPV) but no inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV). Genomic sequencing analysis indicates that the newly confirmed case is linked to a strain that had been circulating in Pakistan in 2019, similar to a case of WPV1 reported in Malawi in February 2022 (For more details on this case, please see the Disease outbreak news published on 3 March 2022).  The last indigenous wild poliovirus case in Mozambique was reported in 1993.Mozambique is also affected by a concurrent outbreak of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), with seven cases reported in the country since 2021, the most recent on 25 March 2022. According to the WHO-UNICEF national immunization coverage estimate, the oral poliovirus vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV1) coverage was 73% and 78% respectively in Mozambique in 2020. Figure: 1: Countries reporting cases of WPV1 and neighboring countries implementing preparedness plansEpidemiology of PoliomyelitisPoliomyelitis (polio) is a highly infectious viral disease that largely affects children under five years of age. The virus is transmitted by person-to-person and spread mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The virus is shed by infected people (usually children) through faeces, where it can spread quickly, especially in areas with poor hygiene and sanitation systems.The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized. In mildly symptomatic cases, initial symptoms include fever, fatigue, headache, vomiting, stiffness in the neck, and pain in the limbs. These symptoms usually last for 2–10 days and most recovery is complete in almost all cases.  However, in the remaining 10% of cases, the virus causes paralysis, usually of the legs, which is most often permanent.  Paralysis can occur as rapidly as within a few hours of infection.  Of cases with paralysis, 5-10% die when their breathing muscles become immobilized.Two of the three types of wild poliovirus have been eradicated (WPV2 and WPV3), with ongoing global efforts to eradicate WPV1. Currently, wild poliovirus is endemic in two countries: Pakistan and Afghanistan. The detection of WPV1 outside these two countries where the disease is endemic demonstrates the continuous risk of international spread of the disease until every corner of the world is free of WPV1.There is no cure for polio; it can only be prevented by immunization.The detection of the current case underscores the need for a large-scale, rapid, multi-country emergency outbreak response across South East Africa, in line with revised international polio outbreak response SOPs.  The foremost priority is to continue to implement the sub-regional emergency response, by continuing to conduct large-scale, rapid and high-quality response campaigns. It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travels and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories, and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas should be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than four weeks) from affected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within four weeks to 12 months of travel.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.The latest epidemiological information on WPVs and cVDPVs is updated weekly on the GPEI website.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and/or trade to Mozambique based on the information available for this current event.   Citable reference: World Health Organization (23 June 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) – Mozambique. Available at : https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON395 This current Disease Outbreak News on the multi-country monkeypox outbreak is an update to the previously published Disease Outbreak News of 10 June, with updated data, some further details on surveillance and reporting, One Health, gatherings, Risk communication and community engagement and International travel and points of entry.In this edition, we are removing the distinction between endemic and non-endemic countries, reporting on countries together where possible, to reflect the unified response that is needed.Outbreak at a glanceSince 1 January 2022, cases of monkeypox have been reported to WHO from 42 Member States across five WHO regions (the Regions of the Americas, Africa, Europe, Eastern Mediterranean, and Western Pacific). As of 15 June, a total of 2103 laboratory confirmed cases and one probable case, including one death, have been reported to WHO. The outbreak of monkeypox continues to primarily affect men who have sex with men who have reported recent sex with new or multiple partners.While epidemiological investigations are ongoing, most reported cases in the recent outbreak have presented through sexual health or other health services in primary or secondary health care facilities, with a history of travel primarily to countries in Europe, and North America or other countries rather than to countries where the virus was not historically known to be present, and increasingly, recent travel locally or no travel at all.Confirmation of one case of monkeypox, in a country, is considered an outbreak. The unexpected appearance of monkeypox in several regions in the initial absence of epidemiological links to areas that have historically reported monkeypox, suggests that there may have been undetected transmission for some time.WHO assesses the risk at the global level as moderate considering this is the first time that many monkeypox cases and clusters are reported concurrently in many countries in widely disparate WHO geographical areas, balanced against the fact that mortality has remained low in the current outbreak.Description of the outbreakBetween 1 January to 15 June 2022, a cumulative total of 2103 laboratory confirmed cases, one probable case, and one death have been reported to WHO from 42 countries in five WHO Regions. The majority of cases (98%) have been reported since May 2022 (Figure 1).Figure 1: Confirmed cases of monkeypox by WHO region from January 2022 to 15 June 2022, data as of 15 June 2022 17:00 CESTNote: the data for the current epi week are incomplete and should be interpreted cautiously.The majority (84%) of confirmed cases (n=1773) are from the WHO European Region. Confirmed cases have also been reported from the African Region (n=64; 3%), the Region of the Americas (n=245; 12%), Eastern Mediterranean Region (n=14; <1%) and Western Pacific Region (n=7; <1%). Of cases reported (468 out 2103 confirmed cases) from 14 countries for which demographic information and personal characteristics are available, 99% are reported in men aged 0 to 65 years (Interquartile range: 32 to 43 years; median age 37 years), of which most self-identify as men who have sex with other men.Figure 2 and Table 1 show the number of cases of monkeypox by country, reported to or identified by WHO from 1 January through 15 June 2022, 5 PM CEST.  The case count is fluctuating as more information becomes available and data are verified under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005).In previous updates, we included suspected cases and deaths in the African Region. We are now focusing primarily on confirmed and probable cases, including deaths among confirmed and probable cases.Figure 2. Geographic distribution of cases of monkeypox reported to or identified by WHO from official public sources, between 1 January and 15 June 2022, 5 PM CEST, (n=2103).Figure 1: Confirmed cases of monkeypox by WHO region from January 2022 to 15 June 2022, data as of 15 June 2022 17:00 CESTTo date, the clinical presentation of monkeypox cases associated with this outbreak has been variable. Many cases in this outbreak are not presenting with the classically described clinical picture for                monkeypox (fever, swollen lymph nodes, followed by a centrifugal evolving rash). Atypical features described include: presentation of only a few or even just a single lesion; lesions that begin in the genital or perineal/perianal area and do not spread further; lesions appearing at different (asynchronous) stages of development; and the appearance of lesions before the onset of fever, malaise and other constitutional symptoms. The modes of transmission during sexual contact remain unknown; while it is known that close physical and intimate skin-to-skin or face-to-face contact can lead to transmission (through direct contact with infectious skin or lesions), it is not clear what role sexual bodily fluids, such as semen and vaginal fluids, play in the transmission of monkeypox.WHO continues to support sharing of information. Clinical and public health incident response has been activated by Member states to coordinate comprehensive case finding, contact tracing, laboratory investigation, clinical management and isolation and implementation of infection and prevention and control measures.Genomic sequencing of viral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), where available, is being undertaken. Several European countries (Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Australia, Canada, Nigeria, Singapore and the United States of America have published full-length or partial genome sequences of the monkeypox virus found in the current outbreak. While investigations are ongoing, preliminary data from polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays indicate that the monkeypox virus genes detected belong to the West African clade.The ACAM-2000 and MVA-BN vaccines are being deployed by some Member States to manage close contacts. Others may hold supplies of LC16 or other vaccines.Interim guidance is being or has been developed to support Member States with raising awareness; surveillance, case investigation and contact tracing; laboratory diagnostics and testing; clinical management and infection prevention and control (IPC); vaccines and immunization; and risk communication and community engagement (please refer to the WHO Guidance and Public Health Recommendations section below).Currently, the public health risk at the global level is assessed as moderate considering this is the first time that monkeypox cases and clusters are reported concurrently in many countries in widely disparate WHO geographical areas, balanced against the fact that mortality has remained low in the current outbreak.In apparently newly affected countries, cases have mainly, but not exclusively, been confirmed amongst men who self-identify as men who have sex with men, participating in extended sexual networks. Person to person transmission is ongoing, still primarily occurring in one demographic and social group. It is likely that the actual number of cases remains an underestimate. This may in part be due to the lack of early clinical recognition of an infectious disease previously thought to occur mostly in West and Central Africa, a non-severe clinical presentation for most cases, limited surveillance, and a lack of widely available diagnostics. While efforts are underway to address these gaps, it is important to remain vigilant for monkeypox in all population groups to prevent onward transmission.At present, transmission in apparently newly affected countries is primarily linked to recent sexual contacts. There is the high likelihood that further cases will be found without identified chains of transmission, including potentially in other population groups. Given the number of countries across several WHO regions reporting cases of monkeypox, it is highly likely that other countries will identify cases and there will be further spread of the virus. Human-to-human transmission occurs through close or direct physical contact (face-to-face, skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to-skin) with infectious lesions or mucocutaneous ulcers including during sexual activity, respiratory droplets (and possibly short-range aerosols), or contact with contaminated materials (e.g., linens, bedding, electronics, clothing, sex toys).The current risk for the general public remains low. There is a risk to health workers if they are in contact with a case while not wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) to prevent transmission; though not yet reported in this current outbreak, the risk of health care-associated infections has been documented in the past. Should monkeypox begin to spread more widely to and within more vulnerable groups, there is the potential for greater health ­­­impact as the risk of severe disease and mortality is recognized to be higher in immunocompromised individuals, including persons with poorly controlled HIV infection. While infection with monkeypox during pregnancy is not fully understood, limited data suggest that infection may lead to adverse outcomes for the foetus or newborn infant and for the mother.To date, all cases identified in newly affected countries whose samples were confirmed by PCR have been identified as being infected with the West African clade. There are two known clades of monkeypox virus, one first identified in West Africa (WA) and one in the Congo Basin (CB) region. The WA clade has in the past been associated with an overall lower case fatality ratio (CFR) of <1% while the CB clade appears to more frequently cause severe disease with a CFR previously reported of up to about 10%; both estimates are based on infections among a generally younger population in the African setting. In the period following the eradication of smallpox, more people were immune to orthopoxviruses through exposure to smallpox or receipt of smallpox vaccine. Therefore, initially most early cases of human monkeypox were among children who were vulnerable and therefore at risk of more severe disease.Vaccination against smallpox was shown in the past to be cross-protective against monkeypox. Today, any continuing immunity from prior smallpox vaccination would in most cases only be present in persons over the age of 42 to 50 years or older, depending on the country, since smallpox vaccination programmes ended worldwide in 1980 after the eradication of smallpox. Protection for those who were vaccinated may have waned over time. The original (first generation) smallpox vaccines from the eradication programme are no longer available to the general public.Smallpox and monkeypox vaccines, where available, are being deployed in a few countries to manage close contacts. Second- and third-generation smallpox vaccines have been developed to have an improved safety profile and one has been approved for prevention of monkeypox. This vaccine is based on a strain of vaccinia virus (known generically as modified vaccinia Ankara Bavarian Nordic strain, or MVA-BN). This vaccine has been approved for prevention of monkeypox in Canada and the United States of America. In the European Union, this vaccine has been approved for prevention of smallpox under exceptional circumstances. An antiviral agent, tecovirimat, has been approved by the European Medicines Agency, Health Canada, and the United States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of smallpox. It is also approved in the European Union for treatment of monkeypox. WHO has convened experts to review the latest data on smallpox and monkeypox vaccines, and to provide guidance on how and in what circumstances they can be used. The advice provided hereafter by the WHO on actions required to respond to the multi-country monkeypox outbreak, is based on its technical work, and informed by consultations with the following existing WHO advisory bodies: the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Infectious Hazards (STAG-IH); the ad-hoc Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) working group on smallpox and monkeypox vaccines; the Emergencies Social Science Technical Working Group; the Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research; WHO Research & Development (R&D) Blueprint consultation: Monkeypox research; the Scientific Advisory Group for the Origins of Novel Pathogens (SAGO); as well as by the outcome of ad-hoc meetings of experts.All countries should be on the alert for signals related to patients presenting with a rash that progresses in sequential stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs, at the same stage of development over all affected areas of the body – that may be associated with fever, enlarged lymph nodes, back pain, and muscle aches. During this current outbreak, many individuals are presenting with atypical symptoms, which includes a localized rash that may present as little as one lesion.  The appearance of lesions may be asynchronous and persons may have primarily or exclusively peri-genital and/or peri-anal distribution associated with local, painful swollen lymph nodes. Some patients may also present with sexually transmitted infections and should be tested and treated appropriately. These individuals may present to various community and health care settings including but not limited to primary and secondary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynaecology, emergency departments and dermatology clinics.Increasing awareness among potentially affected communities, as well as health care providers and laboratory workers, is essential for identifying and preventing further cases and effective management of the current outbreak.Any individual meeting the definition for a suspected case should be offered testing. The decision to test should be based on both clinical and epidemiological factors, linked to an assessment of the likelihood of infection. Due to the range of conditions that cause skin rashes and because clinical presentation may more often be atypical in this outbreak, it can be challenging to differentiate monkeypox solely based on the clinical presentation.Caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox requires early recognition through screening adapted to local settings, prompt isolation and rapid implementation of appropriate IPC measures (standard and transmission-based precautions, including the addition of respirator use for health workers caring for patients with suspected/confirmed monkeypox, and an emphasis on safe handling of linen and management of the environment), physical examination of patient, testing to confirm diagnosis, symptomatic management of patients with mild or uncomplicated monkeypox and monitoring for and treatment of complications and life-threatening conditions such as progression of skin lesions, secondary bacterial infection of skin lesions, ocular lesions, and rarely, severe dehydration, severe pneumonia or sepsis. Patients with less severe monkeypox who isolate at home require careful assessment of the ability to safely isolate and maintain required IPC precautions in their home to prevent transmission to other household and community members.Precautions (isolation) should remain in place until lesions have crusted, scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath.Information should reach those who need it most during upcoming small and large gatherings, particularly among social and sexual networks where there may be close, frequent or prolonged physical or sexual contact, particularly if this involves more than one partner. All efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary stigmatization of individuals and communities potentially affected by monkeypox.WHO is closely monitoring the situation and supporting international coordination working with Member States and partners.For related WHO documents, please see the Information section below. Key updates from these documents as well as highlights from documents under development are provided below for ease of reference.Surveillance and reporting As per IHR (2005) Article 6, a minimum data set (formatted as a case report form) for reporting under IHR has been developed and shared with Member States. The data will be compiled and shared publicly in aggregate form on a regular basis through WHO information products. A separate in-depth Case Investigation and Contact Tracing Form (CIF) for Member States has been also shared with Member States. This form can be used for investigation of exposure risks and transmission dynamics of cases and secondary infection risk in contacts. WHO is working to identify Member States who may be interested in sharing these detailed data, or analyses, to inform the global understanding of the current outbreak. A protocol to support implementation of the CIF is being also finalized.WHO has also implemented the Case Reporting Form (CRF) and CIF in the Go.Data platform to facilitate local capture, analysis, and/or sharing of the relevant data. Analysis of transmission chains and network visualization have been used in past outbreaks to identify clusters, understand patterns of exposure, and quantify viral transmission across different settings. In the context of the current monkeypox outbreak, understanding these patterns of transmission will be critical not only in finding which control measures are effective, but will allow for the characterization of the extent of respiratory transmission and determining if multiple introductions (human or zoonotic) have occurred. To date, limited tools are available for countries to be able to graph these chains of transmission and identify clusters or contexts of transmission in real time. This presents an opportunity for Go.Data to be used by Member States, partners, and institutions to enhance outbreak response activities, mainly in the generation, visualization, and analysis of their chains of transmission. Through its "visualization" feature, Go. Data will allow countries to visualize, in real-time, chains of transmission which will facilitate the monitoring of disease progression as well as the identification of potential new cases that are missed through undetected circulation of the virus or new circulating clades. The Go.Data monkeypox outbreak template and associated metadata description can be obtained upon request by emailing godata@who.int, and technical support for implementation is available from WHO.Laboratory testing and sample managementDetails can be found in Laboratory testing for the monkeypox virus: Interim guidance (23 May 2022)Risk communication and community engagementCommunicating monkeypox related risks and engaging at-risk and affected communities, community leaders, civil society organizations, and health care providers, including those at sexual health clinics, on prevention, detection and care, is essential for preventing further secondary cases and effective management of the current outbreak. Providing public health advice on how the disease transmits, its symptoms and preventive measures and targeting community engagement to the population groups who are most at risk, is critical to minimize spread. Communication must be direct, explicit and engaging for the intended audience.Anyone who has direct contact, (e.g., face-to-face, skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to-skin) including but not limited to sexual contact, with an infected person can get monkeypox. Steps for self-protection include avoiding sexual contact with someone with a localized anogenital rash or skin lesions and limiting the number of sex partners; avoiding close contact with someone who has symptoms consistent with possible monkeypox infection and avoid sharing of personal items (e.g. eating utensils, clothing, electronic devices, bedding); keeping hands clean with water and soap or alcohol-based gels; and maintaining respiratory etiquette.If a person develops symptoms such as a rash with blisters on face, hands, feet, eyes, mouth, and/or genitals and peri-anal areas; fever; swollen lymph nodes; headaches; muscle aches; and fatigue they should contact their health care provider and get tested for monkeypox. If someone is suspected or confirmed as having monkeypox, they should isolate, be tested, undergo clinical evaluation to assess for complications, avoid skin-to-skin and face-to-face contact with others and avoid sex, including receptive and insertive oral, anal, or vaginal sexual intercourse, until all lesions have crusted, the scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath. During this period, cases can get supportive treatment to ease monkeypox symptoms. Anyone caring for a person sick with monkeypox should use appropriate personal protective measures as mentioned above. As a precaution, WHO suggests the use of condoms consistently during sexual activity (receptive and insertive oral/anal/vaginal) for 12 weeks post recovery to reduce the potential transmission of monkeypox for which the risk is as yet not known.Residents and travellers to countries that have long experienced monkeypox should avoid contact with sick mammals such as rodents, marsupials, non-human primates (dead or alive) that could harbour monkeypox virus and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat). In a previous outbreak in 2003 in the United States of America, owners of pet prairie dogs were infected through contact with their infected pets. Therefore, persons with monkeypox in any setting should be mindful of the theoretical risk of exposing animals, for example those who may be kept as pets in the household.WHO is continually updating its content through Monkeypox Q&A, public communication platforms and other materials. Please refer to the WHO Guidance and Public Health Recommendations section below.GatheringsGatherings and events where physical contact, including sex, may be involved may represent a conducive environment for the transmission of monkeypox virus if they entail close, prolonged or frequent interactions among people, which in turn could expose attendees to contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials.Planned gatherings in areas where monkeypox cases have been detected can be safely maintained with a few precautions and sharing of information as required. Furthermore, such events can be used as opportunities to conduct outreach with public health information for specific population groups. It is important to communicate early, often, consistently through known and trusted communication channels and in language and terminology used by the affected populations. Public health authorities and event managers should work together to ensure targeted information reaches event-goers before, during and after the event. Working closely with community-based and civil society organisations that have direct and trusted relationship with affected populations is highly recommended.The following precautionary measures can be considered to reduce risk of monkeypox transmission associated with such events:As it is standard practice for mass gatherings, and even more so during the COVID-19 pandemic, authorities and event organizers are invited to apply the WHO recommended risk-based approach to decision-making, and tailor it to the large or small social events under consideration. In the context of the current outbreak, monkeypox-associated risks should be considered and factored in.One HealthVarious wild mammals have been identified as susceptible to monkeypox virus in areas that have long experienced monkeypox. These include rope squirrels, tree squirrels, Gambian pouched rats, dormice, non-human primates, among others. Some species may have asymptomatic infection. Other species, such as monkeys and great apes, show skin rashes typical of those found in humans. Thus far, there is no documented evidence of domestic animals or livestock being affected by monkeypox virus. There is also no documented evidence of human-to-animal transmission of monkeypox. However, there remains a hypothetical risk of human-to-animal transmission; as such appropriate measures such as physical distancing of persons with monkeypox from domestic pets, proper waste management to prevent the disease from being transmitted from infected humans to susceptible animals at home (including pets), in zoos and wildlife reserves, and to peri-domestic animals, especially rodents.International travel and points of entryBased on available information at this time, WHO does not recommend that Member States adopt any  measures that interfere with international traffic for either incoming or outgoing travellers.Any individual feeling unwell, including fever with rash-like illness, or being considered a suspected or confirmed case of monkeypox by jurisdictional health authorities, should avoid undertaking any travel, including international or local travel, until  no longer considered a public health risk by a health care provider or public health unit. Any individual who has developed a rash-like illness during travel or upon return should immediately report to a health professional, providing information about all recent travel, immunization history including whether they have received smallpox vaccine or other vaccines (e.g. measles-mumps-rubella, varicella zoster vaccine, to support making a diagnosis), and information on close contacts as per WHO interim guidance on surveillance, case investigation and contact tracing for monkeypox (please refer to the WHO Guidance and Public Health Recommendations section below). Individuals who have been identified as contacts of monkeypox cases and, therefore, are subject to health monitoring, should avoid undertaking any travel, including international, until completion of their health monitoring period.Public health officials should work with travel operators and public health counterparts in other locations to contact passengers and others who may have had close contact with an infectious person while travelling. Health promotion and risk communication materials should be available at points of entry, including information on how to identify signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox; on the precautionary measures recommended to prevent its spread; and on how to seek medical care at the place of destination when needed.WHO urges all Member States, health authorities at all levels, clinicians, health and social sector partners, and academic, research and commercial partners to respond quickly to contain local spread and, by extension, the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox. Rapid action must be taken before the virus can be allowed to establish itself as a human pathogen with efficient person-to-person transmission in areas in any previously affected or newly affected areas.  WHO Guidance and Public Health RecommendationsTraining and EducationRisk communication and community engagement Data Management Laboratory Disease outbreak news:WHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other EmergenciesOther ResourcesDocuments under development (for more information see WHO Advice section above): Outbreak at a glanceIn Pakistan, cholera is endemic with an epidemic threshold of a single laboratory confirmed case.In 2022, Sindh province is facing a significant increase in cholera cases with 234 laboratory confirmed cases reported between 15 January to 27 May.  Balochistan and Punjab provinces have also reported 31 and 25 confirmed cases of cholera, respectively.Currently, there is no evidence of cross-border spread of the disease. The risk of potential international spread exists given that Pakistan has long land borders with significant cross border movement and multiple major urban hubs including Karachi city in Sindh province, with international transport hubs. Description of the outbreakOn 26 April 2022, the National IHR Focal Point of Pakistan reported a laboratory confirmed outbreak of cholera in Sindh province, Pakistan.  As of 27 May, three provinces - Sindh, Balochistan, and Punjab, have reported a total of 290 confirmed cases of cholera.  The first laboratory confirmed case was reported on 15 January 2022 in Sindh province.  Between 15 January and 27 May, 234 laboratory confirmed cases, with no deaths, have been reported from the province. Of these cases, 126 (54%) were females, and 114 (49%) were in children younger than nine years old. According to the cholera surveillance national policy, samples from children are prioritized over adults for confirmatory culture testing which may explain the high proportion of confirmed cases among children. As of 27 May, a total of 109 samples have been tested from the public water sources (hydrants) and individual households in Karachi city, Sindh province. Among these, results are available for 71 samples, of which 70% have shown presence of Vibrio cholerae while Escherichia Coli and coliform was detected in 55% and 90% of samples, respectively.In addition to Sindh province, three districts in Balochistan have reported 31 confirmed cases and nine deaths while two districts in Punjab have reported 25 confirmed cases.Figure 1: Distribution of cholera cases in Pakistan, 15 January to 27 May 2022 (n=290)Epidemiology of choleraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Among people who develop symptoms, the majority have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).Cholera can be endemic or epidemic. A cholera-endemic area is an area where confirmed cholera cases were detected during the last three years with evidence of local transmission (cases are not imported from elsewhere). A cholera epidemic can occur in both endemic countries and in non-endemic countries. Uninfected dead bodies have never been reported as the source of epidemics.The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations to inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene, social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.In response to the outbreak, the provincial health authorities of Sindh, Balochistan and Punjab have issued high alert notifications to concerned District Health Offices. The three provincial departments have also officially declared an outbreak in the affected districts. A cholera response plan has been prepared and response activities are being implemented in the affected districts of Sindh, Balochistan and Punjab. This includes establishing sentinel surveillance sites, activating rapid response teams for follow-up of cases and engaging private sector hospitals to enhance reporting. Material support has also been provided to ensure the availability of supplies including ORS, zinc, selected antibiotics and intra venous fluids for case management. Community engagement and health education messages have been developed and disseminated in high-risk communities. Oral cholera vaccine (OCV) campaigns are being planned for affected areas.WHO has provided support to health authorities in Pakistan through: The risk of potential international spread from Sindh province exists given that the most affected districts are located in Karachi city which is an industrial center as well as transport hub with airport and seaport; it is also the largest city in Pakistan and capital of Sindh province. Currently, no international cross-border spread has been confirmed for this event. However, with ongoing transmission in close proximity to border areas and transportation hubs, the risk of international spread cannot be ruled out.In Balochistan province, there is suboptimal surveillance, limited access to safe drinking water, and limited access to health care, and affected areas are in proximity to areas with active cross-border movement with Afghanistan and Iran.In Punjab, although response activities are taking place, the province is still recording an increased number of suspected cholera cases, including in Lahore, the provincial capital and large international commercial hub. Further spread to other provinces would worsen the situation given the frequent population movement.Necessary control measures are being implemented by the national authorities with support from WHO and partners to contain the outbreak, as described in the Public Health Response section above. However, there is a need to further strengthen surveillance by establishing systematic detection and laboratory confirmation of cholera to properly track the evolution of the outbreak and institute timely and appropriate interventions. WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Pakistan based on the currently available information.Cholera fact sheetWeekly Epidemiological Record 2016Weekly Epidemiological Record 2017Weekly Epidemiological Record 2019Weekly Epidemiological Record 2020Citable reference: World Health Organization (17 June 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera in Pakistan. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON391 This current Disease Outbreak News on the multi-country monkeypox outbreak is an update to the previously published Disease Outbreak News of 4 June, with updated data, some further detail on clinical description of cases, measures to increase the safety of gatherings, and again provides summaries of guidance, including on vaccination. Since 13 May 2022, cases of monkeypox have been reported to WHO from 28 Member States across four WHO regions (the Region of the Americas as well as the European, Eastern Mediterranean, and Western Pacific Regions) where monkeypox is not usual or has not previously been reported (Figure 1). In addition, since the beginning of the year, there are 1536 suspected cases reported from eight countries in the WHO African Region, of which 59 cases have been confirmed and 72 deaths reported.  The continuous detection of the virus and deaths reported in some countries in the African Region highlight the need to better understand the source, transmission dynamics and provide people with the information and support they need to protect themselves and others in a range of different contexts.  While epidemiological investigations are ongoing, most reported cases in the newly affected countries have presented through sexual health or other health services in primary or secondary health care facilities with travel history to countries in Europe and North America rather than to countries where the virus is known to be present. In the countries that have long experienced monkeypox, more analysis is needed to understand the ongoing and new sources of infection.  The sudden and unexpected appearance of monkeypox simultaneously in several regions without direct immediate travel links to areas that have long experienced monkeypox suggests that there may have been undetected transmission for several weeks or longer. WHO assesses the risk at the global level as moderate considering this is the first time that many monkeypox cases and clusters are reported concurrently in many countries in widely disparate WHO geographical areas. As of 8 June, 1285 laboratory confirmed cases and one probable case have been reported to WHO from 28 countries in four WHO Regions where monkeypox is not usual or had not previously been reported. This represents an increase of 505 laboratory confirmed cases since the previous Disease Outbreak News on 4 June 2022 when 780 cases were reported. As of 8 June 2022, there have been no associated reported deaths in these four Regions.   Of the cases reported in these regions, the majority (87%) of confirmed cases are from the WHO European Region (1112). Confirmed cases have also been reported from the Region of the Americas (153), Eastern Mediterranean Region (14) and Western Pacific Region (6). The case count fluctuates as more information is reported and becomes available daily and data is verified under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) (Table 1). To date, the clinical presentation of monkeypox cases associated with this outbreak has been variable. Many cases in this outbreak are not presenting with the classically described clinical picture for monkeypox (fever, swollen lymph nodes, followed by rash concentrated on the face and extremities). Atypical features described include: presentation of only a few lesions or even just a single lesion; lesions that begin in the genital or perineal/perianal area and do not spread further; lesions appearing at different (asynchronous) stages of development; and the appearance of lesions before the onset of swollen lymph nodes, fever, malaise or other symptoms. The modes of transmission during sexual contact remain unknown; while it is known that close physical contact can lead to transmission, it is not clear what role  sexual bodily fluids, including semen and vaginal fluids, play in the transmission of monkeypox. The situation is evolving and WHO expects that there will be more cases of monkeypox identified as surveillance expands in all regions and countries. Figure 1. Geographic distribution of cases of monkeypox reported to or identified by WHO from official public sources, between 13 May and 8 June 2022, 5 PM CESTTable 1. Cases of monkeypox in countries where monkeypox is not usually or had not previously been reported, 13 May to 8 June 2022, 5 PM CEST  In addition to the cases reported from or identified in newly affected countries, WHO continues to receive updates on the status of ongoing monkeypox outbreaks and newly reported cases in countries [1] in the African Region through established surveillance mechanisms (including Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response). Since the beginning of 2022, 1536 suspected cases with 72 deaths were reported from eight countries as of 8 June 2022; 59 confirmed cases were reported from six countries during this same period (Table 2). This now includes cases from Ghana that had not previously reported human cases. Although an outbreak of monkeypox in the United States of America in 2003 was linked to small mammals which been imported from Ghana. Laboratory strengthening in countries that have long experienced monkeypox is a priority to enable confirmation of suspected cases. The case fatality ratio seen in the African Region underlines the need for support for all elements of the response including but not limited to, awareness-raising, risk communication, surveillance, diagnostic and laboratory support, and research and analysis in the Region. WHO is providing guidance and reporting forms to countries that have long experienced monkeypox as well as countries that have newly been affected.  Table 2. Cases of monkeypox in WHO African Region reported since January 2022, as of 8 June 2022 [1] [1] For additional information please refer to WHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies hereWHO continues to support sharing of information. Clinical and public health incident response has been activated to coordinate comprehensive case finding, contact tracing, laboratory investigation, clinical management, isolation, and implementation of infection prevention and control measures. Genomic sequencing of viral DNA, where available, is being undertaken. Several European countries (Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and the United States of America have published full-length or partial genome sequences of the monkeypox virus found in the current outbreak. While investigations are ongoing, preliminary data from polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays indicate that the monkeypox virus genes detected belong to the West African clade. Two types of vaccines (ACAM-2000 and MVA-BN) are being deployed by some Member States to serve as prophylaxis for close contacts. Others may hold supplies of other types of vaccines (e.g., LC16). Interim guidance is being or has been developed to support Member States with raising awareness, surveillance, laboratory diagnostics and testing, case investigation and contact-tracing, clinical management and infection prevention control, vaccines and immunization, and risk communication and community engagement. WHO has developed the following documents: Information for the public and groups at risk Monkeypox: what you need to know (2 June 2022) Monkeypox outbreak: update and advice for health workers (26 May 2022)Monkeypox: public health advice for gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM) (25 May 2022)Monkeypox Q&A (20 May 2022)Technical guidance for countries Clinical management and infection prevention and control for monkeypox (10 June 2022)Monkeypox minimum dataset case reporting form (CRF) (4 June 2022) Interim advice on Risk Communication and Community Engagement during the monkeypox outbreak in Europe, 2022 (2 June 2022) Technical brief (Interim) and priority actions: Enhancing readiness for monkeypox in WHO South-East Asia Region (28 May 2022) Laboratory testing for the monkeypox virus: Interim guidance (23 May 2022) Surveillance, case investigation and contact tracing for monkeypox: Interim guidance (22 May 2022) Monkeypox outbreak toolbox (updated June 2022) Documents under development (for more information see WHO Advice section below)Vaccines and immunization for monkeypox Public health advice for gatherings during the current monkeypox outbreakHomecare infographic for monkeypox patientsInterim risk communication and community engagement guidance for the multi-country monkeypox outbreak  Currently, the public health risk at the global level is assessed as moderate considering this is the first time that monkeypox cases and clusters are reported concurrently in many countries in widely disparate WHO geographical areas and without known epidemiological links to countries where monkeypox has been reported for many years. Cases have mainly, but not exclusively, been identified amongst men self-identified as part of extended sexual networks. The sudden appearance and wide geographic scale indicate that widespread human-to-human transmission is underway, for the time being still primarily in one demographic and social group, and the virus may have been present and undetected for several weeks or longer. Additionally, there is currently limited epidemiological and laboratory information, and the actual number of cases is likely an underestimate. This may in part be due to the lack of early clinical recognition of an infection previously known to occur mostly in West and Central Africa, limited surveillance and a lack of rapid diagnostics. At present transmission in newly affected countries is primarily linked to recent sexual contacts. There is a high likelihood that further cases will be found without identified chains of transmission, including potentially in other population groups. Given the number of countries across several WHO regions reporting cases of monkeypox, it is highly likely that other countries will identify cases and there will be further spread of the virus. Human-to-human transmission occurs through close or direct physical contact with infectious lesions or mucocutaneous sores (through face-to-face, skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to-skin transmission) including during sexual activity, respiratory droplets (and possibly short-range aerosols), or contact with contaminated materials (e.g., linens, bedding and clothing).  Although the current risk to human health and to the general public remains low, the public health risk would be greater if this virus exploits the opportunity to establish itself as a widespread human pathogen. There is also a risk to health workers if they are not wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) to prevent contracting an infection; though not reported in this current outbreak, the risk of health care-associated infections has been documented in the past. There is the potential for increased health impact with wider dissemination in vulnerable groups, as the risk of severe disease and mortality is recognized to be higher among children and immunocompromised individuals, including persons with poorly controlled HIV. Infection with monkeypox in pregnancy is poorly understood, although limited data suggests that infection may lead to adverse outcomes for the foetus or newborn infant. To date, all cases identified in newly affected countries whose samples were confirmed by PCR have been identified as being infected with the West African clade. There are two known clades of monkeypox, one identified in West Africa (WA) and one in the Congo Basin (CB) region. The WA clade has in the past been associated with overall lower mortality fewer than one in a hundred cases while the CB clade appears to cause more severe disease with a case fatality ratio (CFR) previously reported of up to one in ten; both estimates are based on infections among a generally younger population in the African setting. Vaccination against smallpox was shown in the past to be cross-protective against monkeypox. However, any immunity from smallpox vaccination will only be present in persons over the age of 42 to 50 years or older, depending on the country, since smallpox vaccination programmes ended worldwide in 1980 after the eradication of smallpox. The original (first generation) smallpox vaccines from the eradication programme are no longer available to the general public. In addition, protection for those who were vaccinated may have waned over time. Smallpox and monkeypox vaccines, where available, are being deployed in a limited number of countries to manage close contacts. While smallpox vaccines have been shown to be protective against monkeypox, one vaccine exists that is approved for prevention of monkeypox. This vaccine is based on a strain of vaccinia virus (known generically as modified vaccinia Ankara Bavarian Nordic strain, or MVA-BN). This vaccine has been approved for prevention of monkeypox in Canada and the United States of America. In the European Union, this vaccine has been approved for prevention of smallpox under exceptional circumstances. An antiviral to treat orthopoxviruses, tecovirimat, has been approved by the European Medicines Agency, the United States Food and Drug Administration and Health Canada. WHO has convened experts to review the latest data on smallpox and monkeypox vaccines, and to provide guidance on how and in what circumstances they should be used. The advice provided hereafter by the WHO on actions required to respond to the multi-country monkeypox outbreak, is based on its technical work, and informed by frequent consultations with the following existing WHO advisory bodies: the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Infectious Hazards (STAG-IH); the ad-hoc Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) working group on smallpox and monkeypox vaccines; the Emergencies Social Science Technical Working Group; the Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research; WHO Research & Development (R&D) Blueprint consultation: monkeypox research; the Scientific Advisory Group for the Origins of Novel Pathogens (SAGO); as well as by the outcome of ad-hoc meetings of experts.  All countries should be on the alert for signals related to patients presenting with a rash that progresses in sequential stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs, at the same stage of development or over all affected areas of the body – that may be associated with fever, enlarged lymph nodes, back pain, and muscle aches. During this current outbreak, many individuals are presenting with localized rash that may be in different stages of development (which is atypical for monkeypox) with peri-genital and/or peri-anal distribution associated with local, painful swollen lymph nodes. Some cases may have secondary bacterial infections, including sexually transmitted infections. These individuals may present to various community and health care settings including but not limited to primary and secondary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynaecology, emergency departments, and dermatology clinics.  Increasing awareness among potentially affected communities, as well as health care providers and laboratory workers, is essential for identifying and preventing further cases and effective management of the current outbreak. Any individual meeting the definition for a suspected case should be offered testing. The decision to test should be based on both clinical and epidemiological factors, linked to an assessment of the likelihood of infection. Due to the range of conditions that cause skin rashes and because clinical presentation may more often be atypical in this outbreak, it can be challenging to differentiate monkeypox solely based on the clinical presentation.  Caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox requires early recognition through screening protocols adapted to local settings, prompt, isolation and rapid implementation of appropriate infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures (standard and transmission-based precautions), physical examination of the patient, testing to confirm diagnosis, symptomatic management of patients with mild or uncomplicated monkeypox and monitoring for and treatment of complications and life-threatening conditions such as progression of skin lesions, secondary infection of skin lesions, and rarely, severe dehydration, severe pneumonia or sepsis.  Precautions (isolation) should remain in place until lesions have crusted, scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath.  Information should reach those who need it most during upcoming small and large gatherings, particularly among social and sexual networks where there may be close, frequent or prolonged physical or sexual contact, particularly if this involves more than one partner. All efforts should be made to avoid the unnecessary stigmatization of individuals and communities potentially affected by monkeypox. WHO is closely monitoring the situation and supporting international coordination working with Member States and partners.  For related WHO documents, please see the Public Health Response section above. Key updates from these documents and highlights from guidance under development are provided below for ease of reference. Surveillance and reporting   An updated format of the minimum data set (formatted as a case report form) is available, as well as the WHO Monkeypox minimum dataset case reporting form (CRF) published online.  A separate Case Investigation and Contact Tracing form for Member States’ own use is currently being finalized and will be shared as soon as available. Laboratory testing and sample management  Details can be found in Laboratory testing for the monkeypox virus: Interim guidance (23 May 2022) Risk communication and community engagement Communicating monkeypox-related risks and engaging at-risk and affected communities, community leaders, civil society organizations, and health care providers, including those at sexual health clinics, on prevention, detection and care, is essential for preventing further secondary cases and effective management of the current outbreak. Providing public health advice on how the disease transmits, its symptoms and preventive measures and targeting community engagement to the population groups who are most at risk, is critical to minimize spread. Communication must be direct, explicit and engaging for the intended audience.  Anyone who has direct contact (e.g., face-to-face, skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to-skin) including but not limited to sexual contact, with an infected person can get monkeypox. Steps for self-protection include avoiding sexual contact with someone with a localized anogenital rash or skin lesions and limiting the number of sex partners; avoiding close contact with someone who has symptoms consistent with possible monkeypox infection; keeping hands clean with water and soap or alcohol-based gels; and maintaining respiratory etiquette. As the summer festival, concert and other events season is beginning in the northern hemisphere, it is important to work with event planners to ensure safe gatherings. Some settings which entail close, prolonged and frequent interactions between people may pose a higher risk of disease transmission. However, such events can be used as opportunities to conduct outreach for specific population groups with public health messaging. It is important to communicate early, often, and consistently through known and trusted communication channels and in language and terminology used by the affected populations. Public health authorities and event managers should work together to ensure targeted information reaches event-goers before, during and after the event. Working closely with community-based and civil society organizations that have direct and trusted relationships with affected populations is highly recommended. If a person develops symptoms such as a rash with blisters on the face, hands, feet, eyes, mouth, and/or genitals and peri-anal areas; fever; swollen lymph nodes; headaches; muscle aches; and fatigue they should contact their health care provider and get tested for monkeypox. If someone is suspected or confirmed as having monkeypox, they should self-isolate, be tested, undergo clinical evaluation to assess for complications, avoid skin-to-skin and face-to-face contact with others and abstain from sex, including insertive/receptive oral, anal, vaginal sexual intercourse, until all lesions have crusted, the scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath. (See Clinical management and infection prevention and control for monkeypox). During this period, cases can get supportive treatment to ease monkeypox symptoms. Anyone caring for a person sick with monkeypox should use appropriate personal protective measures as mentioned above. Based on the precautionary principle, WHO suggests the use of condoms consistently during sexual activity (receptive and insertive oral/anal/vaginal) for 12 weeks after recovery to prevent the potential transmission of monkeypox. Residents and travellers to countries that have long experienced monkeypox should avoid contact with sick mammals such as rodents, marsupials, non-human primates (dead or alive) that could harbour monkeypox virus and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat). WHO is continually updating its content through the monkeypox Q&A, public communication platforms, and other materials. Please see links in Public Health Response section above. Infection, prevention and control in healthcare settings Implementation of appropriate IPC measures is essential to mitigate and control transmission of monkeypox, in health care and community settings; this includes application of a hierarchy of controls (administrative, environmental and engineering controls) and the use of PPE in reducing the risk of exposure to monkeypox within health care settings. Health workers should apply standard precautions regularly, this includes conducting a risk assessment for every patient interaction, respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette, patient placement, PPE, aseptic technique, safe injections and sharps injury prevention, environmental cleaning and disinfection, proper handling of laundry and linen, decontamination and reprocessing or reusable patient care items and equipment, and waste management. WHO advises that transmission-based precautions be implemented for any suspected or confirmed case of monkeypox.   Clinical management and treatment Patients with monkeypox should be given symptomatic treatment for mild symptoms such as antipyretics for fever and analgesics for pain. Skin lesions should be kept clean and adequate nutrition and rehydration is important. Patients should be counselled about signs and symptoms of complications that require urgent care.  Though uncommon, patients with monkeypox may develop severe and life-threatening complications. For example, the confluence of skin lesions is susceptible to bacterial skin and soft tissue infections such as cellulitis, abscesses, and necrotizing soft tissue infections requiring meticulous local wound care and, in some cases, antimicrobial therapy. Subcutaneous accumulation of fluid in the crusting phase may lead to intravascular depletion and shock as well as exfoliation resulting in areas of skin that may require surgical debridement and grafting. Other complications which are rare, include severe pneumonia and respiratory distress; corneal infection which may lead leading to vision loss; loss of appetite; vomiting and diarrhoea leading to severe dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities and shock; cervical lymphadenopathy leading to retropharyngeal abscess or respiratory compromise; sepsis or septic shock; and in rare cases encephalitis and death. It therefore follows that clinical care should focus on management of clinical syndrome, maintenance of nutritional and hydration status and prevention of complications and sequelae, as and when needed.  In patients with monkeypox, antivirals should be used under randomized clinical trials with collection of standardized clinical and patient outcome data to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety. If this is not possible, antivirals may be used under expanded access protocols, such as Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered and Investigational Interventions (MEURI).  See reference for WHO R&D blueprint for additional information. For further information, see Clinical management and infection prevention and control for monkeypox: Interim rapid response guidance, 10 June 2022 Vaccines  The goal of the global outbreak response for monkeypox is to control the outbreak, and to effectively use public health measures to prevent onward spread of the disease. Judicious use of vaccines can support this response.  One vaccine was recently approved for monkeypox. Some countries may hold smallpox vaccine products which could be considered for use according to national guidance. Vaccines may potentially be available in limited quantities through national authorities, depending on the country.  Control of monkeypox outbreaks primarily relies on public health measures including surveillance, contact-tracing, isolation and care of patients. While smallpox vaccines are expected to provide some protection against monkeypox, clinical data are limited.  Most interim vaccination recommendations provided here concern off-label use. Some countries have maintained strategic supplies of older smallpox vaccines from the Smallpox Eradication Programme (SEP) which concluded in 1980. These first-generation vaccines held in national reserves are not recommended for monkeypox at this time, as they do not meet current safety and manufacturing standards.  Many years of research have led to the development of new and safer (second- and third-generation) vaccines for smallpox, some of which may be useful for monkeypox and one of which (MVA-BN) has been approved for the prevention of monkeypox.  The supply of newer vaccines is limited and access strategies are under discussion. Based on currently assessed risks and benefits and regardless of vaccine supply, mass vaccination is not required nor recommended for monkeypox at this time. Human-to-human spread of monkeypox can be controlled by public health measures including early case-finding, diagnosis and care, isolation and contact-tracing.  All decisions around immunization with smallpox or monkeypox vaccines should be by shared clinical decision-making, based on a joint assessment of risks and benefits, between a health care provider and prospective vaccinee, on a case-by-case basis.  Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP): For contacts of cases, PEP is recommended with an appropriate second- or third-generation vaccine, ideally within four days of first exposure (and up to 14 days in the absence of symptoms), to prevent the onset of disease. Pre-exposure prophylaxis is recommended for health workers at high risk of exposure, laboratory personnel working with orthopoxviruses, clinical laboratory personnel performing diagnostic testing for monkeypox, and outbreak response team members as may be designated by national public health authorities.  Vaccination programmes should be accompanied by a strong information campaign, robust pharmacovigilance, and conduct of vaccine effectiveness studies under rigorous clinical trial protocols with standardized collection of clinical and outcome data. One Health  Various wild mammals have been identified as susceptible to monkeypox virus in areas that have long experienced monkeypox. These include rope squirrels, tree squirrels, Gambian pouched rats, dormice, non-human primates, among others. Some species are asymptomatic, especially those suspected of being reservoirs (rodents). Other species, such as monkeys and great apes, show skin rashes typical of those found in humans.  Thus far, there is no documented evidence of domestic animals or livestock being affected by monkeypox virus. There is also no documented evidence of human-to-animal transmission of monkeypox. However, there remains a hypothetical risk of human-to-animal transmission, as such appropriate measures such as physical distancing from persons with monkeypox to domestic pets, proper waste management to prevent the disease from being transmitted from infected humans to susceptible animals at home (including pets), in zoos and wildlife reserves, and also to peri-domestic animals, especially rodents.  Gatherings Gatherings may represent a conducive environment for the transmission of monkeypox virus if they entail close, prolonged and frequent interactions among people, which in turn could expose attendees to contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials.  Postponing or cancelling gatherings in areas where monkeypox cases have been detected is currently not required as a default measure. The following precautionary measure can be considered to decrease risk of monkeypox transmission associated with such events: Event organizers should be aware of the epidemiology of monkeypox in the host area, its modes of transmission and prevention, and what action should be taken if a person develops signs and symptoms compatible with monkeypox, including where appropriate care can be sought. This information should be shared with prospective attendees and all those involved in the event planning and delivery. Gatherings should be used as opportunities for information outreach and community engagement; attention should also be dedicated to the social context in which the event takes place, with a focus on individual risk behaviours associated with side gatherings, unplanned congregation, and unstructured socialization in public or private spaces. People with signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox should refrain from close contact with any other individual and should avoid attending gatherings. They should follow advice issued by relevant health authorities. Although monkeypox and COVID-19 spread between people differently, some of the COVID-19 measures applied during social gatherings, such as keeping a physical distance and practicing regular handwashing, are also effective against the transmission of monkeypox virus.  As skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth and mouth-to-skin transmission during sexual activity has been frequently reported as a likely source of infection during the current monkeypox outbreak, close contact with someone who has signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox should be avoided, including sexual contact; overall risk can be lowered by engaging in safe sexual practices, limiting the number of sexual partners, and practicing good personal hygiene. Attendance lists for participants in gatherings can be introduced, if applicable, to facilitate contact tracing if a monkeypox case is identified. Staff responsible for dealing with attendees who fall ill at the event should be provided with information on how to identify and manage people with signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox. Risk communication and community engagement activities, as well as measures for early detection of international travelers with signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox at points of entry should be considered in host countries where monkeypox cases have been reported.Attendees should always be reminded to apply individual-level responsibility to their decisions and actions, with the aim of preserving their health, that of the people they interact with, and ultimately that of their community. This is especially important for spontaneous or unplanned gatherings. As it is standard practice for gatherings, and even more so during the COVID-19 pandemic, authorities and event organizers are invited to apply the WHO-recommended risk-based approach to decision-making, and tailor it to the large or small social events under consideration. In the context of the current outbreak, monkeypox-associated risks should be considered and factored in. International travel and points of entryBased on available information at this time, WHO does not recommend that States Parties adopt any international travel-related measures for either incoming or outgoing travellers.  Any individual feeling unwell, including fever with rash-like illness, or being considered a suspected or confirmed case of monkeypox by jurisdictional health authorities, should avoid undertaking any travel, including international, until declared as no longer constituting a public health risk. Any individual who has developed a rash-like illness during travel or upon return should immediately report to a health professional, providing information about all recent travel, smallpox immunization history, and information on close contacts as per WHO interim guidance on surveillance, case investigation and contact tracing for monkeypox. Individuals who have been identified as contacts of monkeypox cases and, therefore, are subject to health monitoring, should avoid undertaking any travel, including international, until completion of their health monitoring period.   Public health officials should work with travel operators and public health counterparts in other locations to contact passengers and others who may have had contact with an infectious person while travelling. Health promotion and risk communication materials should be available at points of entry, including information on how to identify signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox; on the precautionary measures recommended to prevent its spread; and on how to seek medical care at the place of destination when needed.  WHO urges all Member States, health authorities at all levels, clinicians, health and social sector partners, and academic, research and commercial partners to respond quickly to contain local spread and, by extension, the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox. Rapid action must be taken before the virus can be allowed to establish itself as a human pathogen with efficient person-to-person transmission in areas that have long experienced monkeypox, as well as in newly affected areas.  For more information on monkeypox, please see: WHO Guidance and Public Health Recommendations  WHO Clinical management and infection prevention and control for monkeypox https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1 WHO Surveillance, case investigation and contact tracing for Monkeypox: Interim guidance, 22 May 2022. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MONKEYPOX-surveillance-2022.1  WHO Laboratory testing for the monkeypox virus: Interim guidance, 23 May 2022. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MONKEYPOX-laboratory-2022.1WHO Monkeypox: public health advice for gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men, 25 May 2022. https://www.who.int/news/item/25-05-2022-monkeypox--public-health-advice-for-gay--bisexual-and-other-men-who-have-sex-with-men  WHO Monkeypox outbreak: update and advice for health workers, 26 May 2022. https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/risk-comms-updates/update_monkeypox-.pdf?sfvrsn=99baeb03_1  WHO Guidance on regulations for the transport of infectious substances 2021-2023, 25 February 2021. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240019720  WHO Technical brief (interim) and priority actions: enhancing readiness for monkeypox in WHO South-East Asia Region, 28 May 2022. https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/searo/whe/monkeypox/searo-mp-techbrief_priority-actions_300522.pdf?sfvrsn=ae7be762_1  ResourcesWHO disease outbreak news: Monkeypox, all items related to multi-country outbreak: https://www.who.int/emergencies/emergency-events/item/2022-e000121  WHO disease outbreak news: Monkeypox, all previous items: https://www.who.int/emergencies/emergency-events/item/monkeypox  WHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies, Epidemiological Week 21, 2022: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/354552/OEW21-1622052022.pdf  WHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies, Week 22, 2022 https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/354782/OEW22-2329052022.pdf   WHO factsheet on monkeypox, publishing date, 19 May 2022.  http://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/monkeypox  WHO Health topics – Monkeypox:   https://www.who.int/health-topics/monkeypox#tab=tab_1   WHO monkeypox outbreak tool kit. https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/documents/emergencies/outbreak-toolkit/monkeypox-toolbox-20112019.pdf?sfvrsn=c849bd8b_2  Open WHO. Online training module. Monkeypox: Introduction. 2020 English:  https://openwho.org/courses/variole-du-singe-introduction  Open WHO. Extended training. Monkeypox epidemiology, preparedness and response. 2021.English:  https://openwho.org/courses/monkeypox-introduction;  Français:  https://openwho.org/courses/variole-du-singe-int%C3%A9roduction   Multicolour, multiplex real-time PCR assay for the detection of human-pathogenic poxviruses. 10.1016/j.mcp.2009.10.008    Real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of monkeypox virus West African and Congo Basin strain DNA. 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.07.012  The current publication of Disease Outbreak News is an update to the previously published Disease Outbreak News of 29 May and also provides short summaries of guidance, including on vaccination.Outbreak at a glanceSince 13 May 2022, and as of 2 June 2022, 780 laboratory confirmed cases of monkeypox have been reported to or identified by WHO from 27 Member States across four WHO regions that are not endemic for monkeypox virus. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing. Most reported cases so far have been presented through sexual health or other health services in primary or secondary health care facilities and have involved mainly, but not exclusively, men who have sex with men (MSM).While the West African clade of the virus has been identified from samples of cases so far, most confirmed cases with travel history reported travel to countries in Europe and North America, rather than West or Central Africa where the monkeypox virus is endemic.  The confirmation of monkeypox in persons who have not travelled to an endemic area is atypical, and even one case of monkeypox in a non-endemic country is considered an outbreak. While most cases are not associated with travel from endemic areas, Member States are also reporting small numbers of cases in travelers from Nigeria, as has been observed before.The sudden and unexpected appearance of monkeypox simultaneously in several non-endemic countries suggests that there might have been undetected transmission for some unknown duration of time followed by recent amplifier events.WHO assesses the risk at the global level as moderate considering this is the first time that many monkeypox cases and clusters are reported concurrently in non-endemic and endemic countries in widely disparate WHO geographical areas.WHO continues to receive updates on the situation in endemic countries.Description of the outbreakAs of 2 June 2022, 780 laboratory confirmed cases have been notified to WHO under the International Health Regulations (IHR) or identified by WHO from official public sources in 27 non-endemic countries in four WHO Regions. This represents an increase of 523 laboratory confirmed cases (+203%) since the Disease Outbreak News of 29 May, when a total of 257 cases were reported. As of 2 June 2022, there have been no deaths associated within the current monkeypox outbreak in non-endemic countries, however, cases and deaths continue to be reported from endemic countries (see Table 2).While investigations are ongoing, preliminary data from polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays indicate that the monkeypox virus strains detected in Europe and other non-endemic areas belong to the West African clade.Figure 1 and Table 1 show the geographical distribution of monkeypox cases reported to or identified by WHO between 13 May to 2 June 2022 in non-endemic countries. The majority of cases (n=688; 88%), were reported from the WHO European Region (20 Countries). Confirmed cases have also been reported from the Region of the Americas (n=80; 10%), Eastern Mediterranean Region (n=9; 1%) and Western Pacific Region (n=3; <1%).The case count fluctuates as more information becomes available daily and data is verified by WHO in accordance with the provisions of the IHR.Figure 1. Geographic distribution of cases of monkeypox in non-endemic countries reported to or identified by WHO from official public sources, between 13 May and 2 June 2022, 5 PM CEST.Table 1. Cases of monkeypox in non-endemic countries reported to or identified by WHO from official public sources between 13 May and 2 June 2022, 5 PM CEST.To date, the clinical presentation of confirmed cases has been variable. Many cases in this outbreak are not presenting with the classical clinical picture for monkeypox. In cases described thus far in this outbreak, common presenting symptoms include genital and peri-anal lesions, fever, swollen lymph nodes, and pain when swallowing. While oral sores remain a common feature in combination with fever and swollen lymph nodes, the local anogenital distribution of rash (with vesicular, pustular or ulcerated lesions) sometimes appears first without consistently spreading to other parts of the body. This initial presentation of a genital or peri-anal rash in many cases suggests close physical contact as the likely route of transmission during sexual contact. Some cases have also been described as having pustules appear before constitutional symptoms (e.g., fever) and having lesions at different stages of development, both of which are atypical of how monkeypox has presented historically. Apart from patients hospitalized for the purpose of isolation, few hospitalizations have been reported. Complications leading to hospitalization have included the need to provide adequate pain management and the need to treat secondary infections.In addition to the cases reported from or identified in non-endemic countries, WHO continues to receive updates on the status of ongoing monkeypox outbreaks in endemic countries[1] in the African region through established surveillance mechanisms (Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response). From January to 1 June 2022, 1408 suspected and 44 confirmed cases including 66 deaths were reported from seven endemic countries (Table 2).[1] Monkeypox endemic countries are: Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana (identified in animals only), Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Nigeria, the Republic of the Congo, and Sierra Leone. Benin and South Sudan have documented importations in the past. Countries currently reporting cases of the West African clade are Cameroon and Nigeria.Table 2. Cases of monkeypox in the WHO African Region reported to WHO from 1 January 2022 to 1 June 2022For additional information please refer to WHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies here. The situation is evolving and WHO expects that there will be more cases of monkeypox identified as the outbreak progresses and as surveillance expands in both endemic and non-endemic countries.WHO continues to support sharing of information about this outbreak of monkeypox. Clinical and public health incident response has been activated at WHO and in many Member States to coordinate comprehensive case finding, contact tracing, laboratory investigation, clinical management, isolation, and implementation of infection and prevention and control measures.Genomic sequencing of viral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of the monkeypox virus, where available, is being undertaken. Several European countries (Belgium, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland and the United States of America) have published full-length or partial genome sequences of the monkeypox virus found in the current outbreak. While investigations are ongoing, preliminary data from PCR assays indicate that the monkeypox virus genes detected belong to the West African clade.ACAM-2000 and MVA-BN vaccines are being deployed by some Member States to manage close contacts. Others may hold supplies of LC16 vaccines.Interim guidance is being developed to support Member States with surveillance, laboratory diagnostics and testing, case investigation and contact tracing, clinical management, vaccines and immunization, and risk communication and community engagement.WHO has updated its guidance on monkeypox outbreak response and published the following documents:WHO interim guidance on the clinical management and infection prevention and control for monkeypox, and on vaccines and immunization for monkeypox, will be published shortly.Currently, the public health risk at the global level is assessed as moderate considering this is the first time that many monkeypox cases and clusters are reported concurrently in non-endemic and endemic countries in widely disparate WHO geographical areas.Cases were initially and mainly identified amongst men self-identified as part of extended sexual networks. The sudden appearance and wide geographic scope of many cases that initially appeared to be sporadic cases indicate that extended human-to-human transmission was facilitated by frequent encounters between persons in close proximity and/or with physical contact. Some countries are reporting that new generations of cases are no longer appearing only among known contacts of previously confirmed cases, suggesting that chains of transmission are being missed through undetected circulation of the virus.  Additionally, as epidemiological and laboratory information are still limited, the actual number of cases is likely an underestimate. This may in part be due to the lack of early clinical recognition of an infection previously known to occur mostly in West and Central Africa, limited surveillance, and a lack of widely available diagnostics in some countries. Given the number of countries across several WHO regions reporting cases of monkeypox, it is highly likely that other countries will identify cases and there will be further spread of the virus.Human-to-human transmission occurs through close proximity or direct physical contact (e.g., face-to-face, skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to-skin contact including during sex) with skin or mucous membranes that may have recognized or unrecognized infectious lesions such as mucocutaneous ulcers, respiratory droplets (and possibly short-range aerosols), or contact with contaminated materials (e.g., linens, bedding, electronics, clothing).Although the current risk to human health and for the general public remains low, the public health risk could become high if this virus exploits the opportunity to establish itself in non-endemic countries as a widespread human pathogen. There is also a risk to health workers if they are not using adequate infection prevention and control (IPC) measures or wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) when necessary, to prevent transmission. Though not reported in this current outbreak, the risk of health care associated infections has been documented in the past in both endemic and non-endemic areas. There is the potential for increased health impact with wider dissemination in vulnerable groups, as the risk of severe disease and mortality is recognized to be higher among children and immunocompromised individuals. There is limited data among people living with HIV, but those who take antiretrovirals and have a robust immune system have not reported a more severe course; those people living with HIV who are not on treatment or remain immunosuppressed may have a more severe course, as documented in the literature. Infection with monkeypox in pregnancy is poorly understood, although limited data suggest that infection may lead to adverse outcomes for the foetus.To date, all cases identified in non-endemic countries whose samples were confirmed by PCR have been identified as being infected with the West African clade. There are two known clades of monkeypox, one endemic to West Africa (WA) and one to the Congo Basin (CB) region. The WA clade has in the past been associated with an overall lower mortality rate of <3% while the CB clade appears to more frequently cause severe disease with a case fatality ratio (CFR) previously reported from 1-10%; both estimates are based on infections among a generally younger population in the African setting.Vaccination against smallpox was shown in the past to be cross-protective against monkeypox. However, any immunity from smallpox vaccination will only be present in persons over the age of 42 to 50 years or older, depending on the country, since smallpox vaccination programmes ended worldwide in 1980 after the eradication of smallpox. The original (first generation) smallpox vaccines from the eradication programme are no longer available to the general public. In addition, protection for those who were vaccinated may have waned over time.Smallpox and monkeypox vaccines, where available, are being deployed in a limited number of countries to manage close contacts. While smallpox vaccines have been shown to be protective against monkeypox, there is also one vaccine approved for prevention of monkeypox. This vaccine is based on a strain of vaccinia virus (known generically as modified vaccinia Ankara Bavarian Nordic strain, or MVA-BN). This vaccine has been approved for prevention of monkeypox in Canada and the United States of America. In the European Union, this vaccine has been approved for prevention of smallpox. An antiviral to treat orthopoxviruses has been also recently approved in the United States of America and in the European Union. WHO has convened experts to review the latest data on smallpox and monkeypox vaccines, and to provide guidance on how and in what circumstances they should be used.The advice provided hereafter by the WHO on actions required to respond to the multi-country monkeypox outbreak, is based on its technical work, and informed by consultations with the following existing WHO advisory bodies: the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Infectious Hazards (STAG-IH); the ad-hoc Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) working group on smallpox and monkeypox vaccines; the Emergencies Social Science Technical Working Group; the Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research; WHO Research & Development (R&D) Blueprint consultation: monkeypox research; the Scientific Advisory Group for the Origins of Novel Pathogens (SAGO); as well as by the outcome of ad-hoc experts meetings.All countries should be on the alert for signals related to people presenting with a rash that progresses in sequential stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs, at the same stage of development over all affected areas of the body – that may be associated with fever, enlarged lymph nodes, back pain, and muscle aches. During this current outbreak, many individuals are presenting with localized rash – peri-genital and/or peri-anal distribution associated with local, painful swollen lymph nodes. Some cases may have secondary bacterial infections and may have simultaneous sexually transmitted infections such as herpes simplex virus, syphilis or N. gonorrhoea. These individuals may present to various community and health care settings including but not limited to primary and secondary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynaecology, emergency departments and dermatology clinics.Increasing awareness among potentially affected communities, as well as health care providers and laboratory workers, is essential for identifying and preventing further cases and effective management of the current outbreak. Information should reach those who need it most during upcoming potentially amplifying large gatherings, and all efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary stigmatization of individuals and communities potentially affected by monkeypox.Any individual meeting the definition for a suspected case should be offered testing. The decision to test should be based on both clinical and epidemiological factors, linked to an assessment of the likelihood of infection. Due to the range of conditions that cause skin rashes and because clinical presentation may more often be atypical in this outbreak, it can be challenging to differentiate monkeypox solely based on the clinical presentation.Caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox requires early recognition through screening protocols adapted to local settings; prompt isolation and rapid implementation of appropriate IPC measures (standard and transmission-based precautions); testing to confirm diagnosis; symptomatic management of patients with mild or uncomplicated monkeypox; and monitoring for and treatment of complications and life-threatening conditions such as progression of skin lesions, secondary infection of skin lesions, and rarely, severe dehydration, severe pneumonia or sepsis.Infection prevention and control (IPC) measures (including supportive isolation of confirmed cases) should remain in place until lesions have crusted, scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath.WHO is closely monitoring the situation and supporting international coordination working with Member States and partners.For WHO documents available publicly, see the Public Health Response section above. Key highlights from these documents and those under development are provided below for ease of reference.Surveillance and reporting A global minimum data set has been created by WHO to facilitate capturing the key epidemiologic parameters on cases, for the purposes of global situational awareness and reporting. Member States are requested to submit the minimum data on all cases meeting the case definitions of probable or confirmed cases, through their IHR National Focal Points to their respective WHO Regional IHR Focal Points, as soon as the data are available. The data will be aggregated and shared publicly in aggregate form on a regular basis through WHO information products. A separate Case Investigation and Contact Tracing form for Member States’ own use is currently being finalized and will be shared as soon as available.Laboratory testing and sample managementThere is an increasing number of commercial PCR kits available on the market, some specific for monkeypox virus detection, some for orthopoxvirus detection. Almost all of them are for research use only, and none is independently validated. Various sets of primers and probes to set up in-house PCR protocols are mentioned in the scientific literature.Risk communication and community engagementCommunicating monkeypox-related risks and engaging at-risk and affected communities, community leaders, civil society organizations, and health care providers, including those at sexual health clinics, on prevention, detection and care, is essential for preventing further secondary cases and effectively managing the current outbreak. Providing public health advice on how the disease transmits, its symptoms and preventive measures and targeting community engagement to the population groups who are most at-risk is critical to minimize spread.Anyone who has direct contact, including but not limited to sexual contact, with an infected person can get monkeypox. Steps for self-protection include avoiding sexual contact with someone with a localized anogenital rash and limiting the number of sex partners; avoiding close contact with someone who has symptoms consistent with possible monkeypox infection; keeping hands clean with water and soap or alcohol-based gels; and maintaining respiratory etiquette.If a person develops symptoms such as a rash with blisters on face, hands, feet, eyes, mouth, and/or genitals and peri-anal areas; fever; swollen lymph nodes; headaches; muscle aches; and fatigue they should contact their health care provider and get tested for monkeypox. If someone is suspected or confirmed as having monkeypox, they should isolate, avoid skin-to-skin and face-to-face contact with others and abstain from sex, including oral sex, until the scabs have fallen off. During this period, cases can get supportive treatment to ease symptoms. Anyone caring for a person sick with monkeypox should use appropriate personal protective measures as mentioned above.Residents and travellers to monkeypox-endemic countries should avoid contact with sick mammals such as rodents, marsupials, non-human primates (dead or alive) that could harbour monkeypox virus and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat).It is also important to prevent the spread of rumours and misinformation around monkeypox.  It is important for public health authorities to systematically listen to and analyse public health concerns, including through social media, identify key questions and information voids, and build resilience to misinformation.  Members of the public should be encouraged to get information only from verified and credible sources.Infection, prevention and control in health care settingsImplementation of appropriate IPC measures is essential to mitigate and control the transmission of monkeypox in health care and community settings; this includes the application of a hierarchy of controls (administrative, environmental and engineering controls) and the use of PPE to reduce the risk of exposure to monkeypox within health care settings. Health workers should apply standard precautions regularly, this includes conducting a risk assessment for every patient interaction, respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette, patient placement, PPE, aseptic technique, safe injections and sharps injury prevention, environmental cleaning and disinfection, proper handling of laundry and linen, decontamination and reprocessing of reusable patient care items and equipment, and waste management. WHO advises that IPC measures should be implemented for any suspected or confirmed case of monkeypox.Clinical management and treatmentThe majority of human monkeypox cases experience mild to moderate symptoms. Patients with monkeypox should be given symptomatic treatment for mild symptoms such as antipyretics for fever and analgesics for pain. Skin lesions should be kept clean. Adequate nutrition and rehydration are important. Patients should be counselled about signs and symptoms of complications which require urgent care.Though uncommon, patients with monkeypox may develop severe and life-threatening complications. For example, the skin lesions are susceptible to bacterial skin and soft tissue infections. The lesions may be extremely itchy and if secondary bacterial infection occur from scratching it may requiring meticulous local wound care and, in some cases, antimicrobial therapy.  Lesions in the mouth or the eye mucosa may also be present. Complications in endemic countries include secondary skin bacterial infections, dehydration, conjuctivitis, keratitis, pneumonia, sepsis or septic shock, and in rare cases encephalitis and death. It therefore follows that clinical care should focus on the management of clinical syndrome, maintenance of nutritional and hydration status, and prevention of complications and sequelae, as and when needed.In patients with monkeypox, antivirals should be used under randomized clinical trials with collection of standardized clinical and patient outcome data to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety. If this is not possible, antivirals may be used under expanded access protocols, such as Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered and Investigational Interventions (MEURI).Vaccines and immunizationThere is a vaccine for monkeypox recently approved by some countries for which supplies are limited. Some countries may hold smallpox vaccine products which could be considered for use according to national guidance. Vaccine products may be available in limited quantities through national authorities, depending on the country.Regardless of vaccine supply, mass vaccination of the population is not required nor recommended for monkeypox; every effort must be made to control human-to-human spread of monkeypox through early case-finding and diagnosis, isolation and contact-tracing.Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) is recommended for contacts of cases with an appropriate second- or third-generation smallpox or monkeypox vaccine, ideally within four days (and up to 14 days) of first exposure to prevent onset of disease.Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is recommended for health workers at high risk of exposure, laboratory personnel working with orthopoxviruses, clinical laboratory personnel performing diagnostic testing for monkeypox, and response team members as may be designated by public health authorities.All decisions around immunization with smallpox or monkeypox vaccines should be based on an assessment of risks and benefits on a case-by-case basis, using shared clinical decision-making.Implementation of vaccination should be accompanied by robust pharmacovigilance, and the conduct of vaccine effectiveness studies under clinical trial protocols is strongly encouraged.One HealthVarious wild mammals have been identified as susceptible to monkeypox virus in endemic areas. This includes rope squirrels, tree squirrels, Gambian pouched rats, dormice, non-human primates, among others. Some species are asymptomatic, especially species suspected of being reservoirs (rodents). Other species, such as monkeys and great apes, show skin rashes similar to those experienced by humans.  Thus far, there are no reports of domestic animals being affected by the monkeypox virus. There are also no reports of human-to-animal transmission of monkeypox. However, there remains a hypothetical risk of human-to-animal transmission. Persons with monkeypox should ensure appropriate management of all waste (such as bandages) and potentially contaminated materials to prevent the disease from being transmitted from infected humans to susceptible animals at home (including pets), or to peri-domestic animals, especially rodents.Large gatheringsLarge gatherings may represent a conducive environment for the transmission of monkeypox virus if they entail close, prolonged and frequent interactions among people, which in turn could expose them to contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials.While postponing or cancelling gatherings in areas where monkeypox cases have been detected is not required as a default measure, precautionary measures can be considered as follows:As it is standard practice for large gatherings, and even more so during the COVID-19 pandemic, authorities and event organizers are invited to apply the WHO recommended risk-based approach to decision-making for mass gatherings, and tailor it to the large or small social events under consideration. In the context of the current outbreak, monkeypox-associated risks should be considered and factored in.International travelBased on available information at this time, WHO does not recommend that States Parties adopt any international travel-related measure for either incoming or outgoing travellers.Any rash-like illness during travel or upon return should be immediately reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel, sexual history and smallpox immunization history. Individuals who have been identified as contacts of monkeypox cases and, therefore, are subject to health monitoring, should avoid undertaking any travel, including international, until completion of their health monitoring period.WHO urges all Member States, health authorities at all levels, clinicians, health and social sector partners, and academic, research and commercial partners to respond quickly to contain local spread and, by extension, the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox. Rapid action must be taken before the virus can be allowed to further establish itself as a human pathogen with efficient person-to-person transmission in both endemic and non-endemic contexts.WHO Guidance and Public Health RecommendationsResourcesCitable reference: World Health Organization (4 June 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Multi-country monkeypox outbreak in non-endemic countries: Update. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON390 Outbreak at a glanceBetween 1 January to 22 May 2022, the health authorities of the Republic of Iraq notified WHO of 212 cases of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF), of which 115 (54%) were suspected and 97 (46%) laboratory-confirmed; there were 27 deaths, 14 in suspected cases and 13 in laboratory confirmed cases. The number of cases reported in the first five months of 2022 is much higher than that reported in 2021, when 33 laboratory confirmed cases were recorded. Cases have been reported in several areas (governorates) in Iraq and the outbreak may pose additional pressure to an already over-stretched health care system.Outbreak descriptionBetween 1 January and 22 May 2022, 212 cases of CCHF have been reported to the WHO from the Iraqi health authorities of which 169 (80%) were reported in April and May alone. Of the 212 cases, 115 were suspected and 97 laboratory confirmed.  Twenty seven deaths occurred overall, of which 13 were in laboratory confirmed cases [case fatality ratio (CFR) 13%; 13/97].The Iraq Central Public Health Laboratory confirmed the cases by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).Among confirmed cases, most had direct contact with animals, and were livestock breeders or butchers. Just over half of the confirmed cases were 15 to 44 years old (n=52; 54%) and of male gender (n=60; 62%).Nearly 50% of confirmed cases (n=47; 48%) were reported in Thiqar governorate, southeast Iraq, and the remainder of cases were reported from 12 different governorates; Missan (13), Muthanna (7), Wassit (6), Diwaniya (4), Baghdad Karkh (4), Kirkuk (3), Basrah (3), Najaf (3), Nineveh (3), Baghdad-Rusafa (2), Babylon (1) and Karbala (1) (Figure 1).Figure 1. Distribution of laboratory confirmed cases of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever by governorate, Iraq, 1 January to 22 May 2022 (n=97).Epidemiology of the diseaseCCHF is a viral tick-borne disease that is transmitted to humans by bites of infected ticks, and by direct contact with blood or tissues from infected humans and livestock. CCHF is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asian countries south of the 50th parallel north – the geographical limit of the principal tick vector.Iraq is one of the eastern Mediterranean countries where CCHF is endemic. CCHF has been reported in Iraq since 1979 when the disease was first diagnosed in ten patients. Since then, six cases were reported between 1989 and 2009; 11 cases in 2010; three fatal cases were reported in 2018; and more recently 33 confirmed cases including 13 deaths (CFR 39%) were reported in 2021.Sheep and cattle husbandry are very common in Iraq. Studies have shown that these animals are regularly infested with tick species, mainly Hylomma species, the principal vector of CCHF.Human cases of CCHF are mainly treated with general supportive care. The antiviral drug ribavirin, both oral and intravenous formulations, has been used to treat CCHF infection. However, no evidence from randomized clinical trials has demonstrated the effectiveness of ribavirin for treating CCHF. There is currently no vaccine available for either people or animals.Health authorities conducted the following multidisciplinary outbreak response:WHO is collaborating with the MoH on the availability of diagnostic kits and genomic sequencing. In addition, WHO and the Iraqi health authorities are holding regular teleconferences to assess and provide guidance for the outbreak response.Thiqar governorate is divided into rural (42% of the governorate) and urban (58%) areas, where livestock farming of sheep, goats, cattle, camels, and buffaloes is an important source of livelihood, especially for the rural population. Subsistent farming is common in villages where animal barns are located near houses and all family members take care of domestic animals. In these settings, CCHF may be transmitted from domestic animals to humans.There is an increased risk of further spread of CCHF within Iraq due to the upcoming religious holiday, Eid al-Adha in July, because more camels, cows, and sheep will be slaughtered during that period. Additionally, international cross-border transmission cannot be ruled out given the increased population movement and possible animal exportation associated with the holiday. During Ramadan, which took place in March and April 2022, the number of CCHF cases steadily increased, and the geographical spread of the disease expanded to more governorates.WHO continues to emphasize the importance of maintaining strong CCHF surveillance, diagnostic capacity, and outbreak response activities by all Member States.WHO also recommends reducing the risk of tick-to-human, animal-to-human, and human-to-human transmission by (i) enforcing relevant preventive measures during slaughtering, butchering and culling procedures, (ii) quarantining animals before they enter slaughterhouses or routinely treat animals with pesticides two weeks prior to slaughtering them, and (iii) ensuring that health care workers implement infection prevention control measures when taking care of CCHF cases or other cases presenting with haemorrhagic fever.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Iraq based on the information that is currently available.Citable reference: World Health Organization (1 June 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever in Iraq. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON386Outbreak at a glanceSix hundred and fifty probable cases of acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children have been reported to WHO from 33 countries in five WHO Regions between 5 April and 26 May 2022. The aetiology of this severe acute hepatitis remains unknown and under investigation; the cases are more clinically severe and a higher proportion develops acute liver failure compared with previous reports of acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children. It remains to be established whether and where the detected cases are above-expected baseline levels. WHO assesses the risk at the global level as moderate.Outbreak description:Following the WHO Multicountry Disease Outbreak News on Acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology published on 23 April 2022, there have been continuing reports of cases of acute hepatitis of unknown cause among young children.As of 26 May 2022, 650 probable cases fitting the WHO case definition1 have been reported to WHO from 33 countries in five WHO Regions, with 99 additional cases pending classification. The majority of reported cases (n=374; 58%) are from the WHO European Region (22 countries), with 222 (34%) cases from the United Kingdom of Great Britiain and Northern Ireland alone. Probable cases and cases pending classification have also been reported from the Region of the Americas (n=240, including 216 cases in the United States of America), Western Pacific Region (n=34), the South-East Asia Region (n=14) and Eastern Mediterranean Region (n=5) (Figure 1, Table 1).Figure 1. Distribution of probable cases of acute severe hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children by country, as of 26 May 2022 (n=650).Table 1. Classification of reported probable cases per country since 1 October 2021, as of 26 May 2022.Out of the 650 probable cases, at least 38 (6%) children have required transplants, and nine (1%) deaths have been reported to WHO.According to the latest Joint Surveillance Report by the WHO Regional Office for Europe (EURO) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) on cases from EU/EEA countries which have been reported through the European Surveillance System (TESSy), as of 20 May 2022:Most of the reported cases appear to be unrelated and extensive epidemiological investigations are underway to identify common exposures, risk factors or links between cases. Two pairs of cases have been reported as epidemiologically linked in Scotland, and linked cases have also been reported in the Netherlands.Based on the working case definition for probable cases, laboratory testing has excluded hepatitis A-E viruses in these children. SARS-CoV-2 and/or adenovirus have been detected in a number of the cases, although the data reported to WHO are incomplete. The United Kingdom has recently observed an increase in adenovirus activity, which is co-circulating with SARS-CoV-2, though the role of these viruses in the pathogenesis is not yet clear.Further detailed epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, histopathological and toxicological investigations of the possible cause(s) of these cases are underway by several national authorities, research networks and across different working groups in WHO and with partners. Additional investigations are also planned to ascertain whether and where the detected cases are above-expected baseline levels.WHO assesses the risk at the global level as moderate considering that:Adenovirus has been found in 75% of the cases tested in the United Kingdom, but the data for other countries are incomplete. Of the small number of samples that have so far been typed, a majority have been confirmed for Type 41 adenovirus (in the United Kingdom, in 27 of 35 cases with an available result). Adenovirus associated virus 2 (AAV-2) has also been detected in a small number of cases in the United Kingdom using meta-genomics in liver and blood samples. However, many of the remaining cases did not have appropriate samples taken, highlighting the importance of appropriate sampling (whole blood) to further characterize the type of adenovirus detected. Additionally, Type 41 adenovirus infection has not previously been linked to such a clinical presentation in otherwise healthy children.While adenovirus is a plausible hypothesis as part of the pathogenesis mechanism, further investigations are ongoing for the causative agent; adenovirus infection (which generally causes mild self-limiting gastrointestinal or respiratory infections in young children) does not fully explain the more severe clinical picture observed with these cases. Factors such as increased susceptibility amongst young children following a lower level of circulation of adenovirus during the COVID-19 pandemic, the potential emergence of a novel adenovirus, SARS-CoV-2 co-infection or a complication of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection, leading to superantigen-mediated immune cell activation, proposed a causal mechanism of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children need to be further investigated. Hypotheses related to side effects from COVID-19 vaccines are currently not supported as most of the affected children did not receive these vaccines. Other infectious and non-infectious explanations as independent or contributory factors need to be excluded to fully assess and manage the risk. It is important to note that the current apparent association identified with adenovirus could be an incidental finding due to enhanced laboratory testing in association with increased levels of community transmission of adenovirus. This will be further clarified with the expansion of adenovirus testing to other cases beyond Europe and the United States, and reporting of the findings from the UKHSA case-control study currently underway.The absence of a confirmed aetiology poses additional challenges in some countries, including implementation of WHO’s case definition and further diagnostic exclusion, due to limited testing capacity, including for Hepatitis A-E viruses and adenovirus. The presence of cases of acute hepatitis in children cannot be ruled out in countries where cases have not been detected or reported yet, but it is unlikely that symptomatic and severely ill case patients requiring hospitalization would remain undetected.Member States are strongly encouraged to identify, investigate and report potential cases fitting the case definition above. Core epidemiological and risk factor information can be collected and submitted by Member States to WHO and partner agencies through agreed reporting mechanisms (e.g. IHR, the TESSy platform in the European Region, and others). WHO is developing a clinical case reporting form to support data collection through the existing WHO Global Clinical Data Platform.Whole blood, serum, urine, stool, respiratory and liver biopsy (if available) samples should be undertaken for all cases meeting the case definition. Especially if testing capacity is limited to conduct a full investigation of the cause, facilities should collect and store samples for future testing, typing, and/or referral testing, as capacity limitations necessitate. WHO is developing interim guidance and establishing a network of regional and global referral labs to support Member States with laboratory testing.  Any epidemiological links between/among the cases might provide clues for tracking the source of illness. Temporal and geographical information of cases, as well as their contacts should be reviewed for potential risk factors. There is an urgent need to gather additional information to assess the potential role of infections, including current adenovirus and on current and past SARS-CoV-2 infection, as well as investigate other potential explanatory/contributing factors (either other infections, toxins, medications, or other underlying diseases (s)).For the prevention of adenovirus and other common infections, perform regular hand washing and respiratory hygiene.Until more is known, general infection prevention and control practices include:Health facilities should adhere to standard precautions and implement contact and droplet precautions for suspected or probable cases.In children with acute hepatitis, the main concern is to identify cases early to ensure optimal case management and to determine the cause, since management and control measures and capacities will depend on the specific causative agent.  While most countries have the capacity for medical treatment of acute hepatitis, this is not true for liver transplantation capacity or for intensive support and care for liver failure.WHO is closely monitoring the situation and supporting international coordination working with Member States and partners.Citable reference: World Health Organization (27 May 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children - Multi-country. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON389 Outbreak at glance                 Since 13 May 2022, cases of monkeypox have been reported to WHO from 12 Member States that are not endemic for monkeypox virus, across three WHO regions. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing, however, reported cases thus far have no established travel links to endemic areas. Based on currently available information, cases have mainly but not exclusively been identified amongst men who have sex with men (MSM) seeking care in primary care and sexual health clinics.The objective of this Disease Outbreak News is to raise awareness, inform readiness and response efforts, and provide technical guidance for immediate recommended actions.The situation is evolving and WHO expects there will be more cases of monkeypox identified as surveillance expands in non-endemic countries. Immediate actions focus on informing those who may be most at risk for monkeypox infection with accurate information, in order to stop further spread. Current available evidence suggests that those who are most at risk are those who have had close physical contact with someone with monkeypox, while they are symptomatic. WHO is also working to provide guidance to protect frontline health care providers and other health workers who may be at risk such as cleaners. WHO will be providing more technical recommendations in the coming days. Description of the outbreakAs of 21 May, 13:00, 92 laboratory confirmed cases, and 28 suspected cases of monkeypox with investigations ongoing, have been reported to WHO from 12 Member States that are not endemic for monkeypox virus, across three WHO regions (Table 1, Figure 1). No associated deaths have been reported to date.Table 1. Cases of monkeypox in non-endemic countries reported to WHO between 13 to 21 May 2022 as at 13:00Figure 1. Geographical distribution of confirmed and suspected cases of monkeypox in non-endemic between 13 to 21 May 2022, as at 13:00.Reported cases thus far have no established travel links to an endemic area. Based on currently available information, cases have mainly but not exclusively been identified amongst men who have sex with men (MSM) seeking care in primary care and sexual health clinics.To date, all cases whose samples were confirmed by PCR have been identified as being infected with the West African clade. Genome sequence from a swab sample from a confirmed case in Portugal, indicated a close match of the monkeypox virus causing the current outbreak, to exported cases from Nigeria to the United Kingdom, Israel and Singapore in 2018 and 2019.The identification of confirmed and suspected cases of monkeypox with no direct travel links to an endemic area represents a highly unusual event. Surveillance to date in non-endemic areas has been limited, but is now expanding.  WHO expects that more cases in non-endemic areas will be reported. Available information suggests that human-to-human transmission is occurring among people in close physical contact with cases who are symptomatic.In addition to this new outbreak, WHO continues to receive updates on the status of ongoing reports of monkeypox cases through established surveillance mechanisms (Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response) for cases in endemic countries [1], as summarized in table 2.[1] Monkeypox endemic countries are: Benin, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana (identified in animals only), Ivory Coast, Liberia, Nigeria, the Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, and South Sudan.Table 2. Cases of monkeypox in endemic countries between 15 December 2021 to 1 May 2022For additional information please refer to WHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies.Epidemiology of the diseaseMonkeypox is a viral zoonosis (a virus transmitted to humans from animals) with symptoms very similar to those seen in the past in smallpox patients, although it is clinically less severe. It is caused by the monkeypox virus which belongs to the orthopoxvirus genus of the Poxviridae family. There are two clades of monkeypox virus: the West African clade and the Congo Basin (Central African) clade. The name monkeypox originates from the initial discovery of the virus in monkeys in a Danish laboratory in 1958. The first human case was identified in a child in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 1970.Monkeypox virus is transmitted from one person to another by close contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials such as bedding. The incubation period of monkeypox is usually from 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days.Various animal species have been identified as susceptible to the monkeypox virus. Uncertainty remains on the natural history of the monkeypox virus and further studies are needed to identify the exact reservoir(s) and how virus circulation is maintained in nature. Eating inadequately cooked meat and other animal products of infected animals is a possible risk factor.WHO has developed surveillance case definitions for the current monkeypox outbreak in non-endemic countries.(case definitions will be updated as necessary)Suspected case:A person of any age presenting in a monkeypox non-endemic country[2] with an unexplained acute rashAND                                        One or more of the following signs or symptoms, since 15 March 2022:ANDfor which the following common causes of acute rash do not explain the clinical picture: varicella zoster, herpes zoster, measles, Zika, dengue, chikungunya, herpes simplex, bacterial skin infections, disseminated gonococcus infection, primary or secondary syphilis, chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale, molluscum contagiosum, allergic reaction (e.g., to plants); and any other locally relevant common causes of papular or vesicular rash.N.B. It is not necessary to obtain negative laboratory results for listed common causes of rash illness in order to classify a case as suspected. [2] Monkeypox endemic countries are: Benin, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana (identified in animals only), Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Nigeria, the Republic of the Congo, and Sierra Leone. Benin and South Sudan have documented importations in the past. Countries currently reporting cases of the West African clade are Cameroon and Nigeria. With this case definition, all countries except these four should report new cases of monkeypox as part of the current multi-country outbreak.Probable case: A person meeting the case definition for a suspected caseANDOne or more of the following:Confirmed case:A case meeting the definition of either a suspected or probable case and is laboratory confirmed for monkeypox virus by detection of unique sequences of viral DNA either by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and/or sequencing.Discarded case:A suspected or probable case for which laboratory testing by PCR and/or sequencing is negative for monkeypox virus.Endemic monkeypox disease is normally geographically limited to West and Central Africa. The identification of confirmed and suspected cases of monkeypox without any travel history to an endemic area in multiple countries is atypical, hence, there is an urgent need to raise awareness about monkeypox and undertake comprehensive case finding and isolation (provided with supportive care), contact tracing and supportive care to limit further onward transmission.Cross-protective immunity from smallpox vaccination will be limited to older persons, since populations worldwide under the age of 40 or 50 years no longer benefit from the protection afforded by prior smallpox vaccination programmes. There is little immunity to monkeypox among younger people living in non-endemic countries since the virus has not been present there.Historically, vaccination against smallpox had been shown to be protective against monkeypox. While one vaccine (MVA-BN) and one specific treatment (tecovirimat) were approved for monkeypox, in 2019 and 2022 respectively, these countermeasures are not yet widely available.Based on currently available information, cases have mainly but not exclusively been identified amongst men who have sex with men (MSM) seeking care in primary care and sexual health clinics.  No deaths have been reported to date. However, the extent of local transmission is unclear at this stage, as surveillance has been limited. There is a high likelihood of identification of further cases with unidentified chains of transmission, including in other population groups. With a number of countries in several WHO regions reporting cases of monkeypox, it is highly likely that other countries will identify cases.The situation is evolving and WHO expects there will be more cases of monkeypox identified as surveillance expands in non-endemic countries. So far, there have been no deaths associated with this outbreak. Immediate actions focus on informing those most at risk for monkeypox infection with accurate information, stopping further spread and protecting frontline workers.Identification of additional cases and further onward spread in the countries currently reporting cases and other Member States is likely. Any patient with suspected monkeypox should be investigated and if confirmed, isolated until their lesions have crusted, the scab has fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath.Countries should be on the alert for signals related to patients presenting with an atypical rash that progresses in sequential stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs, at the same stage of development over all affected areas of the body – that may be associated with fever, enlarged lymph nodes, back pain, and muscle aches. These individuals may present to various community and healthcare settings including but not limited to primary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynecology, urology, emergency departments and dermatology clinics. Increasing awareness among potentially affected communities, as well as health care providers and laboratory workers, is essential for identifying and preventing further secondary cases and effective management of the current outbreak.Considerations relating to surveillance and reportingSurveillanceThe key objectives of surveillance and case investigation for monkeypox in the current context are to rapidly identify cases, clusters, and the sources of infection as soon as possible in order to provide optimal clinical care, isolate cases to prevent further transmission, identify and manage contacts and tailor effective control and prevention methods based on most commonly identified routes of transmission.In non-endemic countries, one case is considered an outbreak. Because of the public health risks associated with a single case of monkeypox, clinicians should report suspected cases immediately to national or local public health authorities regardless of whether they are also exploring other potential diagnoses. Cases should be reported immediately, according to the case definitions above or nationally tailored case definitions. Probable and confirmed cases should be reported immediately to WHO through IHR National Focal Points (NFPs) under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005).Countries should be on the alert for signals related to patients presenting with unusual rash, vesicular or pustular lesions or lymphadenopathy, often associated with fever, in a range of community and health care settings, including but not limited to primary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynecology, and dermatology clinics. Surveillance for rash-like illness should be intensified and guidance provided for collection of skin samples for confirmatory testing.ReportingCase reports should include at a minimum the following information: date of report; reporting location; name, age, sex and residence of the case; date of onset of first symptoms; recent travel history; recent exposure to a probable or confirmed case; relationship and nature of contact with probable or confirmed cases (where relevant); recent history of multiple or anonymous sexual partners; smallpox vaccination status; presence of rash; presence of other clinical signs or symptoms as per case definition; date of confirmation (where done); method of confirmation (where done); genomic characterization (if available); other relevant clinical or laboratory findings, particularly to exclude common causes of rash as per the case definition; whether hospitalized; date of hospitalization (where done); and outcome at time of reporting.A global case reporting form is under development.Considerations related to case investigationDuring human monkeypox outbreaks, close physical contact with infected persons is the most significant risk factor for monkeypox virus infection. If monkeypox is suspected, the investigation should consist of (i) clinical examination of the patient using appropriate infection prevention and control (IPC) measures, (ii) questioning the patient about possible sources of infection and the presence of similar disease in the patient’s community and contacts, and (iii) safe collection and dispatch of specimens for monkeypox laboratory examination. The minimum data to be captured are included above under ‘Reporting’. Exposure investigation should cover the period between five and 21 days prior to symptom onset. Any patient with suspected monkeypox should be isolated during the presumed and known infectious periods, that is during the prodromal and rash stages of the illness, respectively. Laboratory confirmation of suspect cases is important but should not delay implementation of public health actions. Suspected presence of similar disease in the patient’s community or amongst contacts should be further investigated (also known as “backwards contact tracing”).Retrospective cases found by active search may no longer have the clinical symptoms of monkeypox (they have recovered from acute illness) but may exhibit scarring and other sequelae. It is important to collect epidemiological information from retrospective cases in addition to active ones. Retrospective cases cannot be laboratory confirmed; however, serum from retrospective cases can be collected and tested for anti-orthopoxvirus antibodies to aid in their case classification.Samples taken from people with suspected monkeypox or animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection, should be safely handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories. National and international regulations on transport of infectious substances should be strictly followed during the sample packing and transportation to the testing laboratories. Careful planning is required to consider national laboratory testing capacity. Clinical laboratories should be informed in advance of samples to be submitted from persons with suspected or confirmed monkeypox, so that they can minimise risk to laboratory workers and, where appropriate, safely perform laboratory tests that are essential for clinical care.Considerations related to contact tracingContact tracing is a key public health measure to control the spread of infectious disease pathogens such as monkeypox virus. It allows for the interruption of transmission and can also help people at a higher risk of developing severe disease to more quickly identify their exposure, so that their health status can be monitored, and they can seek medical care faster if they become symptomatic. In the current context, as soon as a suspected case is identified, contact identification and contact tracing should be initiated. Case patients should be interviewed to elicit the names and contact information of all such persons. Contacts should be notified within 24 hours of identification.Definition of a contactA contact is defined as a person who, in the period beginning with the onset of the source case’s first symptoms, and ending when all scabs have fallen off, has had one or more of the following exposures with a probable or confirmed case of monkeypox:Contact identificationCases can be prompted to identify contacts across a number of contexts, including household, workplace, school/nursery, sexual contacts, healthcare, houses of worship, transportation, sports, social gatherings, and any other recalled interactions. Attendance lists, passenger manifests, etc. can be further used to identify contacts.Contact monitoringContacts should be monitored at least daily for the onset of signs/symptoms for a period of 21 days from the last contact with a patient or their contaminated materials during the infectious period. Signs/symptoms of concern include headache, fever, chills, sore throat, malaise, fatigue, rash, and lymphadenopathy. Contacts should monitor their temperatures twice daily. Asymptomatic contacts should not donate blood, cells, tissue, organs, breast milk, or semen while they are under symptom surveillance. Asymptomatic contacts can continue routine daily activities such as going to work and attending school (i.e., no quarantine is necessary), but should remain close to home for the duration of surveillance. It may, however, be prudent to exclude pre-school children from daycare, nursery, or other group settings.Options for monitoring by public health authorities are dependent on available resources. Contacts can be monitored passively, actively, or directly.A contact who develops initial signs/symptoms other than rash should be isolated and closely watched for signs of rash for the next seven days. If no rash develops, the contact can return to temperature monitoring for the remainder of the 21 days. If the contact develops a rash, they need to be isolated and evaluated as a suspected case, and a specimen should be collected for laboratory analysis to test for monkeypox.Monitoring exposed health workers and caregiversAny health worker or household member who has cared for a person with probable or confirmed monkeypox should be alert to the development of symptoms that could suggest monkeypox infection, especially within the 21-day period after the last date of care. Health workers should notify infection control, occupational health, and public health authorities to be guided about a medical evaluation.Health workers who have unprotected exposures (i.e., not wearing appropriate PPE) to patients with monkeypox or possibly contaminated materials do not need to be excluded from work duty if asymptomatic, but should undergo active surveillance for symptoms, which includes measurement of temperature at least twice daily for 21 days following the exposure. Prior to reporting for work each day, the health worker should be interviewed regarding evidence of any relevant signs/symptoms as above.Healthcare workers who have cared for or otherwise been in direct or indirect contact with monkeypox patients while adhering to recommended IPC measures may undergo self-monitoring or active monitoring as determined by local public health authorities.Post-exposure vaccination (ideally within four days of exposure) may be considered by some countries for higher risk contacts such as health workers Including laboratory personnel.Travel-related contact tracingPublic health officials should work with travel operators and public health counterparts in other locations to assess potential risks and to contact passengers and others who may have had contact with an infectious patient while in transit.Considerations related to risk communication and community engagementTwo-way communication on monkeypox related risks and engagement of at-risk and affected communities on prevention, detection and care, is essential for preventing further spread of monkeypox and controlling the current outbreak.This includes providing public health advice through the channels that target audiences use on how the disease transmits, its symptoms, preventive measures and what to do in case of suspect or confirmed infection. This should be combined with targeting community engagement to the population groups who are most at risk, working closely with health care providers, including sexual health clinics, and civil society organizations.Risk communication should be informed by insights from social listening detecting public sentiment and should timely address possible rumours and misinformation. Health information and advice should be provided avoiding any form of stigmatization of certain groups such as men who have sex with men (MSM).Key messages include the below:Considerations related to large gatheringsConcerns have been raised by the media with regard to the amplification of the spread of monkeypox virus in the context of large gatherings. Large gatherings may represent a conducive environment for the transmission of monkeypox virus as they entail close, prolonged and frequent interactions among people, which in turn can expose attendees to contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials.While the exact mechanisms of transmission of the present monkeypox outbreak are still being investigated, and they likely differ from those of SARS-CoV-2, it is important to remind that the general precautionary measures recommended against COVID-19 are also expected to largely protect from monkeypox virus transmission.In addition, any person meeting the suspected, probable and confirmed case definition detailed above should refrain from close contact with any other individual and should not attend large gatherings.WHO is closely monitoring the current monkeypox outbreak. While no specific measures are required at this time with regard to holding, postponing or cancelling a mass gathering in areas where monkeypox cases have been detected, information can be shared with prospective attendees of mass gatherings for them to make an informed decision.Considerations related to clinical management and infection prevention and control in health care settingsHealth workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard, contact and droplet precautions. These precautions are applicable in any health facility including outpatient services and hospitals. Standard precautions include strict adherence to hand hygiene, appropriate handling of contaminated medical equipment, laundry, waste and cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces.Prompt isolation of suspected or confirmed cases in a single room with adequate ventilation, dedicated bathroom and staff is recommended. Cohort (confirmed with confirmed, suspected with suspected) can be implemented if single rooms are not available, ensuring minimum of 1-meter distance between patients. Recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) includes gloves, gown, medical mask and eye protection – goggles or face shield. The patient should also be instructed to wear a medical mask when they come into close contact (under 1m) with health workers or other patients, if they can tolerate it. Additionally, a bandage, sheet or gown can be used to cover lesions in order to minimize potential contact with lesions. PPE should be disposed of prior to leaving the isolation area where the patient is admitted.Should aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) (i.e. aspiration or open suctioning of respiratory tract specimens, bronchoscopy, intubation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation), be required for any reason and cannot be delayed, then as a matter of standard practice, a respirator (FFP2 or EN certified equivalent or US NIOSH-certified N95) must be used by health care workers instead of a medical mask.Isolation and transmission-based precautions should be continued until resolution of symptoms (including the resolution of any rash and scabs that have fallen off and healed).Deployment of pharmaceutical countermeasures including specific antivirals (i.e. tecovirimat, which is approved for monkeypox, but not yet widely available) can be considered under investigational or compassionate use protocols, particularly for those who have severe symptoms or who may be at risk of poor outcomes (such as those with immune suppression). There is a vaccine recently approved for monkeypox which is not yet widely available. Some countries may hold smallpox vaccine products which could be considered for use according to national guidance. Any request for vaccine products may potentially be available in limited quantities through national authorities, depending on the country. Countries may want to consider timely vaccination of close contacts as post-exposure prophylaxis or for certain groups of health care workers for pre-exposure vaccination.Based on available information at this time, WHO does not recommend that Member States adopt any international travel-related measure for both, incoming and outgoing travellers.WHO will be providing interim technical guidance in the coming days.Citable reference: World Health Organization (21 May 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Multi-country monkeypox outbreak in non-endemic countries. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON385 Situation at a glanceOn 13 May 2022, WHO was notified of two laboratory confirmed cases and one probable case of monkeypox, from the same household, in the United Kingdom. On 15 May, four additional laboratory confirmed cases have been reported amongst Sexual Health Services attendees presenting with a vesicular rash illness in men who have sex with men (MSM). In contrast to sporadic cases with travel links to endemic countries (see Disease outbreak news on Monkeypox in the United Kingdom published on 16 May 2022), no source of infection has been confirmed yet. Based on currently available information, infection seems to have been locally acquired in the United Kingdom. The extent of local transmission is unclear at this stage and there is the possibility of identification of further cases. On 13 May 2022, the United Kingdom notified WHO of two laboratory confirmed cases and one probable case of monkeypox to WHO. All three cases belong to the same family. The probable case is epidemiologically linked to the two confirmed cases and has fully recovered. The first case identified (index case) developed a rash on 5 May and was admitted to hospital in London, the United Kingdom on 6 May. On 9 May, the case was transferred to a specialist infectious disease centre for ongoing care. Monkeypox was confirmed on 12 May. Another confirmed case developed a vesicular rash on 30 April, confirmed to have monkeypox on 13 May, and is in a stable condition. The West African clade of monkeypox was identified in the two confirmed cases using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT PCR) on vesicle swabs on 12 May and 13 May. On 15 May, WHO was notified of four additional laboratory confirmed cases, all identified among MSM attending Sexual Health Services and presenting with a vesicular rash. All four were confirmed to have the West African clade of the monkeypox virus.Epidemiology of the diseaseMonkeypox is a sylvatic zoonosis with incidental human infections that usually occur in forested parts of Central and West Africa. It is caused by the monkeypox virus which belongs to the orthopoxvirus family. Monkeypox can be transmitted by droplet exposure via exhaled large droplets and by contact with infected skin lesions or contaminated materials. The incubation period of monkeypox is usually from 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days.  The disease is often self-limiting with symptoms usually resolving spontaneously within 14 to 21 days. Symptoms can be mild or severe, and lesions can be very itchy or painful. The animal reservoir remains unknown, although is likely to be among rodents. Contact with live and dead animals through hunting and consumption of wild game or bush meat are known risk factors.There are two clades of monkeypox virus: the West African clade and Congo Basin (Central African) clade. Although the West African clade of monkeypox virus infection sometimes leads to severe illness in some individuals, disease is usually self-limiting. The case fatality ratio for the West African clade has been documented to be around 1%, whereas for the Congo Basin clade, it may be as high as 10%. Children are also at higher risk, and monkeypox during pregnancy may lead to complications, congenital monkeypox or stillbirth.Health authorities in the United Kingdom have established an incident management team to coordinate the extensive contact tracing which is currently underway in health care settings and the community for those who have had contact with the confirmed cases. Contacts are being assessed based on their level of exposure and followed up through active or passive surveillance for 21 days from the date of last exposure to a case. Vaccination is being offered to higher risk contacts. No source of infection has yet been confirmed for either the family or MSM clusters. Based on currently available information, infection seems to have been locally acquired in the United Kingdom. The extent of local transmission is unclear at this stage and there is the possibility of identification of further cases. However, once monkeypox was suspected, authorities in the United Kingdom promptly initiated appropriate public health measures, including isolation of the cases and extensive forward and backward contact tracing to enable source identification.In the United Kingdom, there have been eight previous cases of monkeypox reported: all importations were related to a travel history to or from Nigeria. In 2021, there were also two separate human monkeypox cases imported from Nigeria reported by the United States of America. During an outbreak of monkeypox in humans in 2003 in the United States of America, exposure was traced to contact with pet prairie dogs that had been co-housed with monkeypoxvirus-infected small mammals imported from Ghana.Intensive public health measures should continue in the United Kingdom. In addition to the ongoing forward and backward contact tracing and source tracing, case searching, and local rash-illness surveillance should be strengthened in the MSM and wider community, as well as in primary and secondary health care settings. Any patient with suspected monkeypox should be investigated and isolated with supportive care during the presumed and known infectious periods, that is, during the prodromal and rash stages of the illness, respectively. Timely contact tracing, surveillance measures and raising awareness among health care providers, including sexual health and dermatology clinics, are essential for preventing further secondary cases and effective management of the current outbreak. Additionally, deployment of pharmaceutical countermeasures under investigational protocols can be considered.Health workers and other care givers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard, contact and droplet infection control precautions. Samples taken from people with suspected monkeypox or animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection should be safely handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories. Any illness during travel or upon return from an endemic area should be reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel and immunization history. Residents and travellers to endemic countries should avoid contact with sick animals (dead or alive) that could harbour monkeypox virus (rodents, marsupials, primates) and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat). The importance of hand hygiene by using soap and water or alcohol-based sanitizer should be emphasized.International travel or trade: WHO does not recommend any restriction for travel to and trade with the United Kingdom based on available information at this time.Citable reference: World Health Organization (18 May 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Monkeypox– United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON383  Situation at a glanceCitable reference: World Health Organization (16 May 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Monkeypox– United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON381 Outbreak at a glanceCameroon is among several countries in West and Central Africa experiencing recurrent cholera outbreaks. Between 29 October 2021 and 30 April 2022, a total of 6652 suspected cases including 134 deaths (case fatality ratio 2%) have been reported. Several risk factors can be attributed to the ongoing cholera outbreaks in Cameroon, including wide circulation of Vibrio cholerae in the country, limited access to safe drinking water in some areas, a seasonal pattern of cholera occurrence and inadequate WASH conditions.Description of the outbreakCameroon has been reporting suspected cases of cholera since the beginning of 2021. The outbreak was declared by health authorities on 29 October 2021 and has been ongoing since then. As of 30 April 2022, 6652 suspected cases of cholera including 134 deaths (CFR 2%) have been reported from six regions - the South-West (4617 cases, 77 deaths), Littoral (1704 cases, 51 deaths), South (183 cases, two deaths), Central (125 cases, four deaths), North (15 cases, no death) and Far North (eight cases, no death) regions. Of the 6652 suspected cases, 5960 cases (90%) including 93 deaths (69%) have been reported in 2022. Between 29 October 2021 and 30 April 2022, a total of 1008 stool samples were tested from all six regions and 40 % (403) were confirmed positive for Vibrio cholerae O1 by culture.Although the cholera outbreak started in late October, the number of weekly suspected cases increased from less than 200 in week nine of 2022 (ending 6 March) to 1262 in week 12 (ending 27 March). The overall CFR reported so far in 2022 (CFR 2%) is lower than CFR reported in 2021 (CFR 3.6%), however, it remains higher than the CFR of 1% expected during a cholera outbreak when timely treatment is available.  Furthermore, the Central and Littoral regions continue to report high CFRs (CFR 2.9% and 3%, respectively).While two regions, Central and South-West, reported cases of cholera in 2021, there has been a geographical expansion of the outbreak to five regions (Central, Littoral, North, South, South-West) since March 2022. Figure-1: Epi curve of cholera cases by date of symptom onset and outcome, Cholera, from 29 October to 30 April (n=6652)Note: SE corresponds to Epidemiological week. Also, SE 41 to SE 52 corresponds to 2021 while SE1 to SE17 to 2022.*CEN: Central region; LIT: Littoral region; EN: Far North region; NO: North region; SU: South region and SW: South-West region. Figure 2: Distribution of cholera cases in Cameroon, from 29 October 2021 to 30 April (n=6552)Epidemiology of CholeraEpidemiology of CholeraCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Among people who develop symptoms, the majority have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).Cholera can be endemic or epidemic. A cholera-endemic area is an area where confirmed cholera cases were detected during the last three years with evidence of local transmission (cases are not imported from elsewhere). A cholera epidemic can occur in both endemic countries and in non-endemic countries.The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations to inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced. Uninfected dead bodies have never been reported as the source of epidemics.WHO has deployed teams of experts to support the response and is providing technical, logistical and financial support to the government. In addition, Cameroon is among several countries in West and Central Africa experiencing recurrent cholera outbreaks. Several risk factors including circulation of Vibrio cholerae especially in the North, Littoral, Central, and South-West regions, limited access to safe drinking water in some areas including in the capital city of Yaoundé, as well as cultural practices that contribute to unsafe WASH conditions exist in the country. There is a seasonal pattern of cholera occurrence in Cameroon that varies by region.  In South-West and Littoral, currently the most affected regions, cholera is most often reported during the rainy season (November - April) or the transition between the rainy and the dry season. In the Central region, cholera is more frequently reported during the rainy season that occurs in May-June and October-November. The ongoing rainy season may increase the likelihood of further transmission in the country.In addition, some affected areas of the country are insecure which further reduces the access to services making outbreak response more complex.The cholera outbreak began surging in late October 2021, deteriorated further in March 2022 with the South-West region reporting 70% of cases. Limited geographic accessibility of some areas, security constraints, and suboptimal communication networks lead to irregular epidemiological updates and potential underreporting of cases. Additionally, high population movement of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), weak health system, insufficient human resources, poor knowledge of treatment protocols and low risk communication for cholera continue to pose challenges.Furthermore, in the northern areas, Cameroon is bordered by Adamawa, Borno and Taraba states of Nigeria and there is frequent and substantial cross border movement posing a risk of transmission. There is also a risk of further international spread especially to the Republic of Chad which borders both Nigeria and Cameroon.WHO recommends improving access to clean water and sanitation, good waste management, food safety practices and hygienic practices to prevent the transmission of cholera. Oral cholera vaccines should be used in combination with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in areas known to be high risk for cholera.Strengthening surveillance, especially at the community level, is advised. Appropriate case management, including improving access to care, should be implemented in outbreak-affected areas to reduce mortality. There is a need to ensure that countries are ready to quickly detect and respond to this cholera outbreak to reduce the risk of spread to new areas. Setting up oral rehydration points (ORPs) in communities is also critical to provide early management through oral rehydration, screening and referral of patients. As the outbreak is occurring in border areas where there is significant cross border movement, WHO encourages the respective countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing.International travel or trade: WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to and from Cameroon based on the information available on the current outbreak.Cholera Situation reports in CameroonWHO cholera fact sheetWHO AFRO Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies for week 15 (4-10 April 2022)Citable reference: World Health Organization (16 May 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera - Cameroon. Available at:https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON374  Outbreak at a glanceFrom 22 March to 3 April 2022, two laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), including one death, were reported to the WHO by the National IHR Focal Point of Qatar. Both cases had frequent close contact with dromedary camels and consumption of their raw milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. The Qatar Ministry of Public Health immediately initiated case investigation and contact tracing. These are the first cases of MERS-CoV infection reported from Qatar since February 2020. The notification of these cases reiterates the need for global awareness of MERS-CoV but does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries.Outbreak overviewBetween 22 March and 3 April 2022, the National IHR Focal Point of Qatar reported two laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection to the WHO.The first case was a 50-year-old male, working and living in a camel farm in Al Shaniya Doha. On 16 March, the case presented to the emergency department at Hamad Medical Corporations in Doha with a history of productive cough for one-week, high grade fever and shortness of breath. The patient was admitted to the medical ward on 17 March, and on 18 March due to a deterioration of the health status was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). A nasopharyngeal swab was collected and tested positive for MERS-CoV by reverse transcription polymecercarase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (upE and Orf1a genes) at the virology laboratory, Hamad Medical Corporation on 19 March. The patient has no comorbidities, and reported frequent close contact with dromedary camels and consumption of their raw milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms.  No recent travel history was reported for the case or any of the case’s contacts. None of the identified four contacts reported symptoms of the disease and all tested MERS-CoV negative. No further information on the health status of the case is available at the time of writing.The second case was an 85-year-old male, dromedary camel owner living in Doha. On 18 March, the patient presented to the emergency department at Hamad Medical Corporations with a history of productive cough for one-week, high grade fever and shortness of breath, and was admitted to the medical ward on the same day, during which the clinical status of the patient deteriorated. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected and tested positive for MERS-CoV by RT-PCR (upE and ORF1a genes) at the Hamad Medical Corporation virology laboratory on 19 March. On 22 March, the patient was intubated and transferred to the ICU where he died on 14 April. The patient had comorbidities including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia. The epidemiological investigation revealed that 14 days prior to admission to the hospital the case had travelled with his camel to Saudi Arabia, where he visited other dromedary camel owners. The case also reported frequent contact with dromedary camels, as well as consuming raw milk from dromedary camels in Saudi Arabia.The case initially presented to a health centre while he was in Saudi Arabia, with symptoms including vomiting, loss of appetite, fever, and chills. He was subsequently diagnosed with an acute urinary tract infection. The medical staff at the health center in Saudi Arabia referred him to a hospital, but he decided to return to Qatar immediately. Investigation of 12 household contacts and health care workers has been completed and all have tested negative for MERS-CoV . The IHR-NFP of Saudi Arabia has also been notified.Before these notifications, the last MERS-CoV infection reported from Qatar was in February 2020.  Since 2012, Qatar has reported a total of 28 human cases of MERS-CoV, and 7 deaths, including the two new reported cases. There have been no hospital outbreaks or reported infections among healthcare workers.According to the national protocol for management of MERS-CoV cases, both patients were isolated, and the infection prevention and control protocol was activated. The Ministry of Public Health immediately initiated case investigation and contact tracing. Respiratory swabs were collected from 12 household contacts, 4 co-workers and 15 health care workers and all tested negative for MERS-CoV. None of the above contacts reported any symptoms of MERS-CoV. All contacts have been monitored until the end of their monitoring period (14 days from the last exposure to the patients) and no secondary cases were identified. Infection prevention and control measures in all health facilities have been reinforced by the Ministry of Public Health. Health education messages about appropriate preventive measures will be shared with all contacts and they will be advised to comply with the recommended public health measures for MERS-CoV and to report to the health authorities if they develop any respiratory symptoms. The Animal Health Resources Department has been notified and investigation of dromedary camels is ongoing.MERS-CoV is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Approximately 35% of reported patients with MERS-CoV have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems and the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries who are the natural host and zoonotic source of MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans but it has, so far, mainly occurred in health care settings and to a limited extent among close contacts.One of the new reported cases had travel history outside of Qatar and it is likely that the infection was acquired as a result of zoonotic infection from direct or indirect contact with infected dromedary camels. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be exported from countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries by travelers who may acquire infection after exposure to: 1) infected dromedaries or dromedary products (for example, following contact with camels); or 2) to infected humans (for example, in a health care setting).As of 12 May 2022, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2591 including 894 associated deaths and reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date. The majority of the reported cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. Outside of this region, there has been one large outbreak in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in Republic of Korea and 1 in China) and 38 deaths were reported.The notification of these cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or in a healthcare setting. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.As a general precaution, anyone visiting farms, markets, barns or other places where dromedaries are present, should practice general hygiene measures, including regular hand washing after touching animals, avoiding touching eyes, nose or mouth with hands, and avoiding contact with sick animals. People may also consider wearing protective gowns and gloves while professionally handling animals.The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk, meat, blood and urine, carries a high risk of infection from a variety of organisms that might cause disease in humans. Animal products processed appropriately through proper cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption but should also be handled with care, to avoid cross-contamination with uncooked foods.Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities.Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care setting and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.Reference:Citable reference: World Health Organization (12 May 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) – Qatar. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON370 Situation at a glance:WHO was notified of a human case of avian influenza A (H5) in Colorado State in the United States of America on 29 April 2022.  The case was involved in culling of poultry at a farm where influenza A (H5N1) virus was confirmed in the poultry. Avian influenza A (H5) was confirmed in the case on 27 April by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and subtype N1 was confirmed subsequently by sequence analysis. The close contacts and people involved in culling of poultry have been identified, tested and are currently being followed up. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low and for occupationally exposed persons it is considered to be low-to-moderate. Description of the case:On 29 April 2022, the National IHR Focal Point of the United States of America notified WHO of a laboratory confirmed human case of avian influenza A(H5), in a male from Colorado State.The case developed fatigue on 20 April, during participation in slaughtering poultry from 18 to 22 April, at a commercial poultry facility in Colorado where influenza A (H5N1) virus had been confirmed in the poultry.Upon request of the organization providing personnel for culling of poultry at this facility, a respiratory sample was collected from the case on 20 April. The sample was received by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Laboratory Services on 22 April and testing was completed on 25 April. Influenza A virus was detected by reverse transcriptase- polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The sample was sent to the Influenza division of the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for further confirmation. Influenza A(H5) virus was confirmed by RT-PCR on 27 April and subtype N1 was subsequently confirmed by sequence analysis. On 20 April 2022, a total of nine samples from close contacts of the case and persons who participated in culling of poultry at the same facility were collected; all tested negative for influenza. Additional respiratory specimens were obtained on 28 April from the same nine contacts and tested negative for influenza. Virus characterization including genetic analysis to compare the virus sequence obtained from the human sample to virus sequences obtained from the poultry outbreak and antigenic analysis to compare with existing candidate H5 vaccine viruses are ongoing.The close contacts of the patient have been recommended to receive influenza antiviral prophylaxis. The investigation is ongoing to determine if there are additional close contacts.All individuals who were exposed to poultry and involved in depopulation activities at this facility are being monitored for symptoms for 10 days following the last date of their last exposure and will be tested if symptomatic in accordance with the US CDC guidelines and US Department of Agriculture guidance. Close contacts of the index case are also being monitored. Since 2003 to 31 March 2022, a total of 864 cases and 456 deaths of influenza A(H5N1) human infection have been reported worldwide from 18 countries, however, this is the first reported case in the United States of America. The most recent case in humans prior to the current case, was reported in January 2022 in a case who had symptom onset in December 2021, from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Therefore, sporadic human cases are not unexpected.The virus has not been detected in humans beyond this single case in the United States of America. Public health measures from both the human and animal health agencies have been implemented. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low and for occupationally exposed persons it is considered to be low-to-moderate. This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a comprehensive epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization.When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, people involved in specific, high-risk tasks such as sampling sick birds, culling and disposing of infected birds, eggs, litters and cleaning of contaminated premises should be trained on the proper use of and provided with appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE). All persons involved in these tasks should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for seven days following the last day of contact with poultry or their environments.Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.International travel or trade: WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. Citable reference: World Health Organization (27 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Avian Influenza A (H5N1) – the United States of America. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-E000111Outbreak at a glanceAs of 28 April 2022, a cumulative of 37 human cases of Japanese encephalitis (25 laboratory-confirmed cases and 12 probable cases) have been reported in four states in Australia with symptom onset dating back to 31 December 2021. This outbreak represents the first locally-acquired cases detected on the Australian mainland since 1998. Enhanced and targeted surveillance activities are ongoing to better understand the extent of transmission and to inform control activities. Further investigations are needed to assess the ongoing risk in Australia. Description of the outbreakOn 7 March 2022, the Australian health authorities notified WHO of three laboratory-confirmed human cases of Japanese encephalitis (JE). The first human JE case was reported on 3 March 2022 from Queensland. As of 28 April 2022, the Australian Government’s Department of Health reported 37 cumulative confirmed and probable human cases of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection, including three deaths (2 confirmed, 1 probable). Twenty-five confirmed cases were reported from four states: New South Wales (11 cases, 1 death), Queensland (2 cases), South Australia (3 cases) and Victoria (9 cases and 1 death). In addition, 12 probable cases have been reported from: New South Wales (2 cases), Queensland (2 cases), South Australia (5 cases, 1 death) and Victoria (3 cases) (Figure 1).Figure 1. Distribution of confirmed (n=25) and probable (n=12) human cases and deaths (n=3) of Japanese encephalitis (JE) and states in which JE virus has been detected in pigs, Australia, 2022.The number of JE cases and deaths reported in 2022 is unusually high as compared to only 15 cases notified in Australia in the ten years prior to this outbreak. Of these 15 cases, only one case was acquired in Australia in the Tiwi Islands, Northern Territory; the remaining 14 cases were acquired overseas. These are also the first known locally-acquired detections of JE in humans in these states of Australia and the first detections in mainland Australia since a single case was detected in 1998 in Cape York, Queensland.JEV, which infects both humans and animals, has also been detected in animals in Australia. In late February 2022, JEV was confirmed in commercial pig farms in the states of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria, then in South Australia in early March. Affected piggeries had experienced unusual levels of reproductive losses and neonatal deaths. As of 20 April, JEV has been detected in 73 pig farms across the four states. Prior to February 2022, infection with JEV has not been previously detected in animals further south in mainland Australia than the northern peninsula area of Cape York. Epidemiology of Japanese EncephalitisAlthough a rare disease in humans, JE is a serious viral infection caused by the JEV spread by infected Culex spp. mosquitos in Asia (e.g. Culex tritaeniorhynchus) and parts of the West Pacific (e.g. Culex annulirostris). Numerous wild and domestic animal species can become infected, although most do not develop clinical signs and only a few develop sufficient viraemia (when the virus is present in bloodstream) to infect the mosquito vector which can result in further transmission. In natural cycles, wading birds such as herons and egrets are the important amplifying hosts, although pigs also develop significant viraemia that can infect vectors. The species most important in the ecology of the disease in Australia are yet to be determined.JEV cannot be transmitted from human to human, or by consuming meat from an infected animal. Prior to this outbreak, JEV was considered unusual in Australia. Previously, JE was only rarely reported in humans in the north of Australia in Queensland (Torres Strait Islands and northern parts of Cape York Peninsula), with only 15 cases notified in Australia in the past ten years prior to this outbreak; only one of these cases acquired their infection in Australia with the remainder acquired overseas. In early 2021, one human case was reported from the Northern Territory (Tiwi Islands). The source of infection for this case remains unknown. The population of Australia is unlikely to have any significant natural immunity from prior infection, including asymptomatic infection, because the virus is not endemic to mainland Australia.The vast majority of JEV infections are asymptomatic. There are no treatments for JE and the case fatality rate among symptomatic cases can be as high as 30%. Permanent neurologic or psychiatric sequelae can occur in 30–50% of cases with encephalitis. In an immunologically naïve population, all age groups are at risk for JEV infection. There are two JE vaccines for humans registered for use in Australia only advised for risk groups. There is no vaccine for animals registered for general use in Australia. A vaccine is available for use under permit in horses intended for export, and work is underway to make this vaccine available under an emergency use permit so that horse owners can protect their animals.The Australian Government’s Departments of Health and Agriculture, Water and Environment are working closely with state and territory government counterparts and affected animal industries to ensure a coordinated response across human and animal health. The Australia Government has declared the JE outbreak a Communicable Disease Incident of National Significance under the Emergency Response Plan for Communicable Disease Incidents of National Significance. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing with increased and targeted surveillance activities being carried out. Australian authorities are implementing vector control activities to remove potential mosquito breeding sites, reduce vector populations and minimize individual exposures.Human, animal and environmental investigations are ongoing to understand the increased transmission of JEV in humans and animals in Australia in 2022 and better assess the current and future risk. Serological evidence of JEV exposure is periodically detected in animals in the Torres Strait Islands off the north coast of Queensland, but transmission on the mainland has not been previously established. The current event therefore represents a significant change in the presence of the virus in Australia. Local transmission of JEV to humans requires environmental conditions capable of sustaining an enzootic cycle, thus, the risk of infection can vary substantially within any endemic country. JE transmission intensifies during the rainy season, during which vector populations increase. Internationally, there has not yet been evidence of increased JEV transmission following major floods or tsunamis.Thirty-seven confirmed and probable cases of infection with JEV including three deaths have been identified in Australia with symptom onsets from 31 December 2021. The latest symptom onset of the cases was 14 March 2022. The cases were reported from four different states, three of which had no history of past local JE virus transmission. Vaccination against JEV is not used for the general population in Australia and is usually only advised for people travelling to endemic regions and for people undertaking activities with increased risk of exposure, thus, the immunologically naive population could be more susceptible to severe disease. As the colder months approach in southern Australia, a reduction in mosquito populations, and with that, a reduction in transmission is expected in all susceptible species.The risk at the regional and global level is assessed as low. The JEV does not transmit between humans, therefore the likelihood of international disease spread among humans is low. However occasional overseas acquired cases have been reported among unvaccinated individuals returning from an area with active transmission.Vector control: WHO recommends increased public awareness of JEV in the affected states and the implementation of activities to remove potential mosquito breeding sites, reduce vector populations and minimize individual exposures, including vector control strategies targeting both the immature and adult stages of the mosquito. Vector control should include environmental management (eliminating stagnant pools of water including waste/polluted water) and chemical control (including larval control and adult vector control including residual spraying of walls of animal shelters with approved insecticides). Homes near pig farms or animal shelters should be protected with mosquito-proof screens on windows and doors.Personal protective measures: The peak biting period of Culex vectors is during the evening (after sunset) and night. Personal protective measures including use of mosquito repellent, should be encouraged. Insecticide-treated mosquito nets provide good protection during sleep at night.Surveillance:Vaccination: Vaccine strategies should be designed and implemented with due consideration for the fact that, in an immunologically naïve population, all age groups are at risk for JEV infection.Travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event.Citable reference: World Health Organization (28 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Japanese Encephalitis - Australia. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON365Outbreak at a glance:Outbreak overview:Ebola virus disease is present in animal reservoirs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and before this EVD outbreak, the country had reported 13 EVD outbreaks since 1976. The current outbreak is the third EVD outbreak in Equateur province and the sixth in the country since 2018. The last outbreak in the Equateur Province was declared over in November 2020, after 130 confirmed and probable cases were recorded and nearly six months after the first cases were reported (more details, published in Disease outbreak news on 18 November 2020).  Full genome sequencing was performed at the INRB in Kinshasa and results indicate that this outbreak represents a new spill-over from the animal population.Figure-1: Confirmed cases of EVD in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as of 27 April EVD response interventions include: Preliminary information indicates that the first confirmed case was treated at home from the onset of symptoms before being admitted to two health facilities between 16 to 21 April. Since the case was isolated after the onset of haemorrhagic signs, there is a risk of EVD spread in the province. Additionally, due to inadequate IPC measures in place at the health facilities there is also the risk of spread among health workers and co-patients of the two facilities which the patient visited prior to the confirmation of EVD.The exposure of the first case remains unknown, and therefore, it is difficult to assess the extent of the outbreak at this stage.The current resurgence is not unexpected given that EVD is endemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Ebola virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region. A confluence of environmental and socioeconomic factors such as poverty, community mistrust, weak health systems, and political instability may be accelerating the rate of the emergence of EVD in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Although Mbandaka has experienced two EVD outbreaks in 2020 and 2018, some of the improvements achieved by establishing capacities such as IPC measures in health facilities during previous outbreaks have not been maintained over time to tackle the current outbreak. There is a need to support the province's health professionals to conduct an effective response. In addition, logistical support is needed to reactivate the health infrastructure that was put in place during previous epidemics.The risk of regional and international spread of this epidemic is not precluded as the city of Mbandaka borders the Congo River and has river and land connections with the capital Kinshasa, the Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic, and Angola. Mbandaka also has air connections with Sud Ubangi province bordering Central African Republic and the Republic of Congo and the capital Democratic Republic of the Congo - Kinshasa. WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce Ebola virus disease transmission in humans:International travel or trade:WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel or trade to Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the current situation.[1] relating to, or resulting from the influence of human beings on natureCitable reference: World Health Organization (27 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Ebola virus disease- Democratic Republic of the Congo. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON377 Outbreak at a glanceMeasles is endemic in Somalia with cases reported every year. In 2022, between epidemiological week 1 and 9, a cumulative of 3509 suspected measles cases have been reported from 18 regions in the country. Response activities are ongoing with WHO providing technical support on surveillance, vaccination, laboratory, case management, training of care health workers and risk communication. Given the low levels of vaccination coverage and a high prevalence of both malnutrition and vitamin A deficiency among children aged under 5 years, the overall risk for measles at the national level is assessed as very high. This risk is further aggravated by a complex humanitarian crisis caused by conflict and droughts, and related displacements. Outbreak overviewBetween 2 January and 5 March 2022, a cumulative of 3509 suspected measles cases have been reported from 18 regions in the country, largely from drought-affected districts. Of these 18 regions, six regions including Bay (1194 suspected cases), Mudug (796 suspected cases), Banaadir (559 suspected cases), Bari (277 suspected cases), Lower Shabelle (121 suspected cases) and Gedo (141 suspected cases) reported the highest number of measles cases.  Between 2 January to 5 March, a total of 249 samples were collected and tested at four laboratories in the country (in Garowe, Hargeisa, Kismayo, and Mogadishu).  Of these samples, 57% (142 samples) tested positive for measles Immunoglobulin M (IgM); 81% were less than five years of age.Measles is endemic in Somalia and the annual number of cases has varied substantially in recent years. The largest measles outbreak in recent years was recorded in 2017 when 23 039 suspected cases were reported in 118 districts across all six federal states and the Banaadir Regional Administration of Somalia. In the ongoing epidemic in drought affected districts, a total of 2596 suspected measles cases were reported to WHO in 2020, while a total of 7494 suspected measles cases were reported in 2021.Figure-2: Geographic distribution of suspected measles cases in Somalia reported from 2 January – 5 March 2022 Note: Data does not include newly detected suspected cases that are pending classification Epidemiology of measles:Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. It is mainly transmitted through direct contact with infected persons, or indirectly via breathing in contaminated air or touching infected surfaces. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body.The first sign of measles is usually a high fever, which begins about 10 to 12 days after exposure to the virus and lasts four to seven days. A runny nose, a cough, red and watery eyes, and small white spots inside the cheeks can develop in the initial stage. After several days, a rash erupts, usually on the face and upper neck. Over about three days, the rash spreads, eventually reaching the hands and feet. The rash lasts for five to six days, and then fades. On average, the rash occurs 14 days after exposure to the virus (within a range of 7 to 18 days).Most measles-related deaths are caused by complications associated with the disease. Serious complications are more common in children under the age of five or adults over the age of 30. The most serious complications include blindness, encephalitis (an infection that causes brain swelling), severe diarrhoea and related dehydration, ear infections, or severe respiratory infections such as pneumonia. Severe measles is more likely among poorly nourished young children, especially those with insufficient vitamin A, or whose immune systems have been weakened by HIV/AIDS or other diseases.No specific antiviral treatment exists for measles virus. Severe complications from measles can be reduced through supportive care that ensures good nutrition, adequate fluid intake and treatment of dehydration.The overall risk at the national level is assessed as very high due to:The overall risk at the regional level was assessed as moderate due to the unrestricted movement of people between Somalia and neighbouring countries (Ethiopia, Kenya, and Djibouti) where vaccination coverage is also suboptimal.The overall risk at the global level was assessed as low given the existing response capacity in place.Vaccination: Enhanced routine measles vaccination for children and conducting outbreak response mass immunization campaigns are key strategies for effective control of the epidemic and reducing mortality.Citable reference:  World Health Organization (27 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera - Malawi. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON371    Outbreak at a glanceOn 27 March 2022, the United Kingdom notified WHO of a cluster of cases with monophasic Salmonella Typhimurium sequence type 34 infection. Investigations linked the outbreak to chocolate produced in Belgium, which have been distributed to at least 113 countries. A global alert was released by INFOSAN on 10 April, initiating a global product recall. To date, a total of 151 genetically related cases suspected to be linked to the consumption of the implicated chocolate products have been reported from 11 countries. The risk of spread in the WHO European region and globally is assessed as moderate until information is available on the full recall of the products.Outbreak overviewOn 27 March 2022, WHO was informed by the IHR National Focal Point of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the United Kingdom) of a widely distributed cluster of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) with an unidentified source. Molecular typing confirmed isolation of the bacteria S. Typhimurium sequence typing (ST) 34 and epidemiological evidence has subsequently linked the outbreak to chocolate products from Belgium, which, as of 25 April 2022, have been found to be distributed to at least 113 countries and territories1 across all WHO RegionsMonophasic S. Typhimurium matching the human outbreak cases were identified in buttermilk tanks at the Ferrero Corporate plant in Arlon, Belgium in December 2021 and January 2022. After implementing hygiene measures and negative Salmonella testing, the implicated products (all Kinder products manufactured at the implicated facility (Arlon) including Kinder Surprise, Kinder Mini Eggs, Kinder Surprise Maxi 100g and Kinder Schoko-Bons) were distributed across Europe and globally.According to the analyses of the United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA), the outbreak strain is resistant to six types of antibiotics: penicillins, aminoglycosides (streptomycin, spectinomycin, kanamycin, and gentamycin), phenicols, sulfonamides, trimethoprim, tetracyclines.As of 25 April 2022, a total of 151 genetically related cases of S. Typhimurium suspected to be linked to the consumption of the implicated chocolate products have been reported from 11 countries (Figure 1): Belgium (26 cases), France (25 cases), Germany (10 cases), Ireland (15 cases), Luxembourg (1 case), the Netherlands (2 cases), Norway (1 case), Spain (1 case), Sweden (4 cases), the United Kingdom (65 cases) and the United States of America (1 case).Figure 1. Geographical distribution of reported Salmonella Typhimurium outbreak cases (n=151) and countries where implicated products have been distributed (n=113), as of 25 April 2022.Symptom onset dates of cases ranged from 21 December 2021 to 28 March 2022. Children under 10 years of age (n=134; 89%) were disproportionately affected and females represented 66% (n=99) of reported cases. Information on reported symptoms and severity were available for 21 cases, and of these, 12 (57%) reported bloody diarrhea and nine (43%) were hospitalized. As of 25 April 2022, no fatalities associated with the outbreak has been reported. Epidemiology of SalmonellosisSalmonellosis is a disease caused by nontyphoidal Salmonella bacteria. While approximately 2,500 serotypes have been identified, the majority of human infections are caused by two serotypes of Salmonella: Typhimurium and Enteritidis.Salmonellosis is characterized by acute onset of fever, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that can be bloody as reported in most of the cases in the current outbreak. The onset of symptoms typically occurs 6–72 hours after ingestion of food or water contaminated with Salmonella, and illness lasts 2–7 days. Symptoms of salmonellosis are relatively mild and patients will make a recovery without specific treatment in most cases. However, in some cases, particularly in children and elderly patients, the associated dehydration can become severe and life-threatening.Salmonella bacteria are widely distributed in domestic and wild animals, such as poultry, pigs, and cattle; and in pets, including cats, dogs, birds, and reptiles such as turtles. Salmonella can pass through the entire food chain from animal feed, primary production, and all the way to households or food-service establishments and institutions. Salmonellosis in humans is generally contracted through the consumption of contaminated food of animal origin (mainly eggs, meat, poultry, and milk). Person-to-person transmission can also occur through the faecal-oral route.Salmonella infections are typically mild and do not require treatment, however, children and elderly individuals are at greater risk for severe complications related to associated dehydration. To date, most cases have been in children under 10 years of age which may be due to the implicated product being targeted at children.While there have been no fatalities associated with the outbreak reported as of 25 April 2022, among the cases with information on symptoms and severity (n=21), a high hospitalization rate (43%; n=9) was observed. Further information is needed to allow for a more accurate assessment of the severity associated with this event, including data on symptoms.The outbreak has been epidemiologically and molecularly linked to chocolate produced in Belgium and distributed globally to over 113 countries and territories across all WHO Regions. While 150 of 151 known cases have been reported in Europe, one case has been reported in the United States of America and there is the likelihood of additional cases being reported from other countries given the broad distribution of the products during the Easter holiday which may lead to increased consumption of the implicated product or transportation of the implicated product to additional locations as a result of holiday-related travel.Given that the identification of existing cases was through advanced molecular techniques, which are not routinely used in all countries, there is a likelihood that some proportion of cases will go undetected.The risk of the event spreading within the most affected WHO Region, the WHO European Region, as well as globally is assessed as moderate until information is available on the full recall of the implicated products. Countries that have reported cases have good capacity for case management; however, information on disease severity associated with this event is still limited.Prevention of salmonellosis: Prevention requires control measures at all stages of the food chain, from agricultural production, to processing, manufacturing and preparation of foods in both commercial establishments and at home.General prevention measures for the public also include: handwashing with soap and water in particular after contact with pets or farm animals, or after having been to the toilet; ensuring food is properly cooked; drinking only pasteurized or boiled milk; avoiding ice unless it is made from safe water; washing of fruits and vegetables thoroughly.WHO recommends the general public to follow the information provided by their national governments to get more information about the outbreak and implicated products.Surveillance:Treatment: Routine antimicrobial therapy is not recommended for mild or moderate cases in healthy individuals. This is because antimicrobials may not completely eliminate the bacteria and may result in resistant strains, which subsequently can lead to the drug becoming ineffective. Treatment in severe cases is electrolyte replacement (to provide electrolytes, such as sodium, potassium and chloride ions, lost through vomiting and diarrhoea) and rehydration.1 List of countries to which the implicated products have been found to be distributed (as of 25 April): Albania,  Algeria,  Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Aruba (Netherlands), Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, British Virgin Islands (UK), Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cayman Islands (United Kingdom), Central African Republic, China, Comoros, Congo (Brazzaville), Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,  Curaçao (Netherlands), Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, French Guiana (France), French Polynesia (France), Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guadeloupe (France), Guinea, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Martinique (France), Mauritania, Mauritius, Mayotte (France), Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Caledonia (France), New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of North Macedonia, Réunion (France), Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Vatican City, Viet Nam.Citable reference: World Health Organization (26 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Multi-country outbreak of Salmonella Typhimurium linked to chocolate products – Europe and the United States of America. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON369 Outbreak at a glanceDescription of the outbreakOn 3 March 2022, the Ministry of Health Malawi declared a cholera outbreak in the country, following confirmation of a case in a 57-year-old male, from Machinga district, in Southern Malawi.  On 28 February, the case developed watery diarrhoea and visited Machinga hospital where cholera was confirmed on 2 March.  Samples from the patient tested positive by culture and Vibrio cholerae O1, serotype Inaba was isolated. The case had a history of travel to two cities – Blantyre and Machinga -- prior to being admitted to the district hospital. Although an epidemiological investigation was carried out, the source of the infection was not identified.Figure- 2: Distribution of cholera cases in Malawi, as of 26 April  Citable reference: World Health Organization (27 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Cholera - Malawi. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON372 Outbreak at a glanceOn 6 March 2022, WHO received notification from the Uganda Ministry of Health of four suspected yellow fever cases. As of 25 April 2022, a total of seven suspected cases tested positive for yellow fever antibodies by plaque reduction neutralization test. However, further investigations identified only one laboratory confirmed case of yellow fever reported from Wakiso district, Central Region. The MoH declared an outbreak, and a rapid response team was deployed to the affected districts. Due to the potential of epidemic spread in Uganda and the risk of spread to neighboring countries, WHO assesses the risk to be high at the national and regional levels. Outbreak overviewOn 6 March 2022, the Uganda Ministry of Health (MoH) notified WHO of four suspected yellow fever cases, with specimens collected between 2 January and 18 February 2022, which tested positive for yellow fever antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and by plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) at the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI). As of 25 March 2022, three additional samples, with specimens collected between 1 – 13 October 2021, tested positive for antibodies by PRNT at the UVRI. All the seven suspected cases tested negative by Polymerase Chain Reaction.Cases presented with symptoms including fever, vomiting, nausea, diarrhoea, intense fatigue, anorexia, abdominal pain, chest pain, muscle pain, headache, and sore throat. None of the cases presented with severe yellow fever symptoms of acute jaundice.The majority of the suspected cases were females (n=6) with an age range between 15 to 57 years. Five were reported from Wakiso district, and one each from Masaka and Kasese districts.Of the seven suspected cases, epidemiological investigations were conducted for six cases, and investigation is pending on one case. As of 25 April 2022, five of the six cases investigated had a recent history of vaccination and were consequently discarded in the absence of evidence suggesting vaccination failure, and one case (reported from Wakiso district) was confirmed as yellow fever. Epidemiology of Yellow FeverYellow fever is an epidemic-prone mosquito-borne vaccine preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. Once contracted, the yellow fever virus incubates in the body for 3 to 6 days. The majority of infections are asymptomatic, but when symptoms occur, the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent backache, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms disappear after 3 to 4 days.A small proportion of patients, however, can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Death could occur within 7 - 10 days in about half of the patients with severe symptoms. There is currently no specific anti-viral drug for yellow fever, but early supportive treatment, such as specific care to treat dehydration, fever, and liver and kidney failure could improve survival rates.  Forty countries globally, 27 in Africa and 13 in Central and South America are classified as high-risk for yellow fever. Since September 2021, 13 countries in the WHO African Region have reported probable and confirmed yellow fever cases and outbreaks, including an ongoing outbreak under close investigation in neighbouring Kenya. These outbreaks are occurring in large geographic areas of the Western, Central and Eastern regions of Africa. They have affected areas that have previously conducted large-scale mass vaccination campaigns but with persistent and growing gaps in immunity due to lack of sustained population immunity through routine immunization and/or secondary to population movements (newcomers without history of vaccination). These reports indicate a resurgence and intensified transmission of the yellow fever virus.After the Uganda MoH declared a yellow fever outbreak in the country they activated the Public Health Emergency Operation center. They are also deploying a rapid response team to affected districts where all cases were reported to determine the extent of the outbreak, identify the at-risk population, conduct a risk assessment, initiate risk communication and community engagement activities and implement integrated vector control measures.Yellow fever vaccine has not been introduced into the Uganda routine immunization schedule; however, the country has an imminent plan to introduce it in mid-2022, followed by phased mass vaccination campaigns (PMVCs). Pending the evolution of the situation and response planning, a request maybe submitted to the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on vaccine provision for preventive yellow fever vaccination in areas as indicated by ongoing investigations.Uganda is endemic for yellow fever and is classified as a high-risk country in the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) Strategy. The country has history of outbreaks reported in 2020 (Buliisa, Maracha and Moyo districts), 2019 (Masaka and Koboko districts), 2016 (Masaka, Rukungiri, and Kalangala districts) and in 2010 when ten districts were affected in Northern Uganda.The confirmed case is reported from Wakiso district, close to the greater Kampala metropolitan area. The district also includes Entebbe, where the international airport is located.Uganda has not introduced the yellow fever vaccine into routine immunization and the estimated overall population immunity is low (4.2%), and attributable to past reactive vaccination activities supported by ICG in focal districts including Yumbe, Moyo, Buliisa, Maracha, Koboko (2020), Masaka, and Koboko (2019), in limited scope in the Greater Kampala area (2017), Masaka, Rukungiri, and Kalangala districts (2016).Epidemic spread of yellow fever is a risk in Uganda as there could be onward amplification if the virus is introduced in crowded urban areas that are known hubs for travel. There is the risk for further amplification and international spread because of frequent population movements (e.g., between Uganda, Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan), coupled with the low population immunity in some neighbouring countries.The recurrent outbreaks indicate the ongoing risk of zoonotic spill over of yellow fever and risk for disease amplification in both rural and densely settled urban areas in the largely unimmunized population.Despite the yellow fever vaccine being highly effective (99% effective within 30 days of vaccination), the risk of breakthrough cases exists.  These cases should be investigated to identify and address possible causes of vaccine failure.Considering the above-described scenario, the risk is assessed as high at the national and regional levels, and low at the global level.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and review the risk assessment based on the latest available information.Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries, the presence of a yellow fever outbreak in neighbouring Kenya, and the risk of onward spread. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is also recommended.Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever. Completion of the nation-wide population protection through vaccination will help avert the risk of future outbreaks. WHO supports the plan of the Uganda Ministry of Health to introduce the yellow fever vaccine into the national routine immunization schedule, as well as the following implementation of phased mass vaccination campaigns.Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites including the use of repellents and insecticide treated mosquito nets. The highest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening.Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Infected returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present.International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Uganda. Yellow fever vaccination is required by national authorities for international travellers over one year of age entering Uganda.In accordance with the IHR (2005) third edition, the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever becomes valid 10 days after vaccination and the validity extends throughout the life of the person vaccinated. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.We would like to acknowledge the National Authorities of Uganda for the information provided to enable the publication of this Disease Outbreak News.Citable reference: World Health Organization (25 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Yellow Fever - Uganda. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2022-DON367Outbreak at a glanceWHO was notified on 7 March 2022 of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 3 (cVDPV3) in an unvaccinated child from Jerusalem city. Investigations (including environmental, epidemiological and virological) are ongoing to determine the origin of cVDPV3 and the scope of circulation. As of 15 April, a total of seven VDPV3 positive have been confirmed, including the index case and six asymptomatic children. As an immediate response, immunization activities with inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and catch-up vaccination were initiated in Jerusalem, and a bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV) campaign started on 4 April 2022 in Jerusalem district which has been extended to the entire country as of 13 April. Given the high immunization coverage and robust surveillance system in the country, the risk of national spread is considered ‘moderate’.Description of outbreakOn 7 March 2022, the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point (NFP) for Israel notified WHO of the detection of cVDPV3 in the country. According to the notification, cVDPV3 virus was isolated from an acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) case, in an unvaccinated child aged 3 years and 9 months, from the city of Jerusalem. The case had onset of paralysis on 17 February 2022. The isolated virus has 17 nucleotide changes from Sabin 3 (vaccine strain) and is genetically linked to a cluster of VDPV3 previously detected from environmental samples from Jerusalem and Bethlehem city, collected between September 2021 to January 2022. These vaccine-derived poliovirus isolates, previously classified as ambiguous, have now been reclassified as circulating.As of 15 April, a total of seven VDPV3 positive have been confirmed, including the index case and six asymptomatic children. Of these seven children, only one had incomplete polio immunization while the other six were unvaccinated.There were also an additional two children where VDPV3 was detected using in-house molecular techniques. Further confirmation is ongoing.According to the routine immunization estimates provided by the IHR-NFP for Israel, the third dose of inactivated poliovirus (IPV) and first dose of oral polio vaccine (OPV) coverage in Israel was estimated to be 97.6% and 88.3% respectively in 2020.Epidemiology of PoliomyelitisPoliomyelitis (polio) is a highly infectious viral disease that largely affects children under five years of age. The virus is transmitted by person-to-person and spread mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis.The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. The virus enters the body through the mouth and multiplies in the intestine.  It then invades the nervous system. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized. In symptomatic cases, initial symptoms include fever, fatigue, headache, vomiting, stiffness in the neck, and pain in the limbs. These symptoms usually last for 2–10 days and most recovery is complete in almost all cases.  However, in the remaining 10% of cases, the virus causes paralysis, usually of the legs, which is most often permanent.  Paralysis can occur as rapidly as within a few hours of infection.  Of cases with paralysis, 5-10% die when their breathing muscles become immobilized.The virus is shed by infected people (usually children) through faeces, where it can spread quickly, especially in areas with poor hygiene and sanitation systems.There is no cure for polio; it can only be prevented by immunization. Given the high level of vaccination coverage and robust surveillance system in Israel, the risk of further spread in the country, and in the occupied Palestinian territory, is likely to be moderate, as immunization gaps persist in certain high-risk areas/population groups.WHO currently assesses the risk of further international spread associated with this cVDPV3 detection as low due to high population immunity, robust AFP surveillance, and existing response capacity. Investigation and response activities are being coordinated between the public health authorities of Israel and occupied Palestinian territory, and between WHO European and Eastern-Mediterranean Regional Offices . Vaccination:Surveillance:International Health Regulations:International travel or trade     The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of WHO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Citable reference: World Health Organization (15 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Circulating Vaccine-derived poliovirus type 3 – Israel. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/circulating-vaccine-derived-poliovirus-type-3---israel  Situation at a glance:On 5 April 2022, WHO was notified of 10 cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children under the age of 10 years, across central Scotland. By 8 April, 74 cases had been identified in the United Kingdom. Hepatitis viruses (A, B, C, E, and D where applicable) have been excluded after laboratory testing while further investigations are ongoing to understand the aetiology of these cases. Given the increase in cases reported over the past one month and enhanced case search activities, more cases are likely to be reported in the coming days.Description of cases:On 5 April 2022, the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point (NFP) for the United Kingdom notified WHO of 10 cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in previously healthy young children (age range: 11 months to five-year-old) across central Scotland. Of these 10 cases, nine had onset of symptoms in March 2022 while one case had an onset of symptoms in January 2022. Symptoms included jaundice, diarrhoea, vomiting and abdominal pain. All 10 cases were detected when hospitalised.As of 8 April 2022, further investigations across the United Kingdom have identified a total of 74 cases (including the 10 cases) fulfilling the case definition1. The clinical syndrome in identified cases is of acute hepatitis with markedly elevated liver enzymes, often with jaundice, sometimes preceded by gastrointestinal symptoms, in children principally up to 10 years old. Some cases have required transfer to specialist children’s liver units and six children have undergone liver transplantation. As of 11 April, no death has been reported among these cases and one epidemiologically linked case has been detected.Laboratory testing has excluded hepatitis type A, B, C, and E viruses (and D where applicable) in these cases while Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and/or adenovirus have been detected in several cases. The United Kingdom has recently observed an increase in adenovirus activity, which is co-circulating with SARS-CoV-2, though the role of these viruses in the pathogenesis (mechanism by which disease develops) is not yet clear. No other epidemiological risk factors have been identified to date, including recent international travel. Overall, the aetiology of the current hepatitis cases is still considered unknown and remains under active investigation. Laboratory testing for additional infections, chemicals and toxins is underway for the identified cases.Following the notification from the UK, less than five cases (confirmed or possible) have been reported in Ireland, further investigations into these are ongoing. Additionally, three confirmed cases of acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology have been reported in children (age range 22-month-old to 13-year-old) in Spain. The national authorities are currently investigating these cases.Clinical and public health response has been implemented across the United Kingdom to coordinate case finding with investigation into the cause of illness in these cases.Further investigations by the national authorities are ongoing to include more detailed exposure history, toxicology testing, and additional virological/microbiological tests. Guidance has been issued to experts to support a thorough investigation of suspected cases.Further investigations and a clinical and public health response to the cases reported are also being undertaken in Ireland and Spain. The United Kingdom has reported a recent unexpected significant increase in cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in young children. Although the potential role of adenovirus and/or SARS-CoV-2 in the pathogenesis of these cases is one hypothesis, other infectious and non-infectious factors need to be fully investigated to properly assess and manage the risk.As there is an on-going increasing trend in cases in the United Kingdom over the past month together with more extensive case searching, it is very likely that more cases will be detected before the aetiology has been found (either biological, chemical or other agent(s)) and corresponding appropriate control and prevention measures have been taken.WHO is closely monitoring the situation with other Member States and the United Kingdom and partners for cases with similar profiles.Further work is required to identify cases both inside the United Kingdom and internationally. The priority is to determine the aetiology of these cases to guide further clinical and public health actions. Any epidemiological links between or among the cases might provide indications for tracking the source of illness. Temporal and geographical information of the cases, as well as their contacts should be reviewed for potential risk factors.While some cases tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 and/or adenovirus, genetic characterization of viruses should be undertaken to determine any potential associations between cases.  Member States are strongly encouraged to identify, investigate and report potential cases fitting the case definition.International travel and trade: WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and/or trade with the United Kingdom, or any other country where cases are identified, based on the currently available information.The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), Increase in hepatitis (liver inflammation) cases in children under investigation1 Working case definitions include.•Confirmed: A person presenting with an acute hepatitis (non-hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, E) with aspartate transaminase (AST) or Alanine transaminase (ALT) over 500 U/L, who is 10 years old and under, since 1 January 2022.•Possible: A person presenting with an acute hepatitis (non-hepatitis viruses A-E) with AST or ALT over 500 U/L, who is 11-16 years old, since 1 January 2022.•Epi-linked: A person presenting with an acute hepatitis (non-hepatitis viruses A-E) of any age who is a close contact of a confirmed case since 1 January 2022.Citable reference: World Health Organization (15 April 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology - the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/acute-hepatitis-of-unknown-aetiology---the-united-kingdom-of-great-britain-and-northern-ireland Outbreak at a glanceDuring the period 12 January to 15 March 2022, a total of 53 suspected yellow fever cases, including six deaths, have been reported from Isiolo county, central Kenya. Two samples tested positive by RT-PCR and six were positive by ELISA, indicating probable yellow fever cases. The last reported yellow fever outbreak in Kenya was in 2011. WHO assesses the public health risk as high at the national and regional levels.Outbreak overviewOn 4 March 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Kenya declared an outbreak of yellow fever in the county of Isiolo in central Kenya (around 270 km north of the capital Nairobi). As of 15 March, a total of 53 suspected yellow fever cases have been reported from Isiolo county during the period 12 January to 15 March 2022, including six deaths (case fatality ratio: 11.3%) (Figure 1). The majority of the cases are males (47 cases; 88.7%), and the average age of cases is approximately 28 years (range: 3-78 years).Figure 1. Epidemiological curve of yellow fever cases by date of symptoms onset and outcome, Isiolo county, Kenya, 1 January - 15 March 2022 (n=53).Suspected cases presented with symptoms of fever, jaundice, and muscle and joint pain. Overall, eleven wards within Isiolo county have been affected, with the highest number of cases reported in: Chari (21 cases; 39.6%), Cherab (14 cases; 26.4%) and Garba Tulla (5 cases; 9.4%) (Figure 2).Figure 2. Number of yellow fever cases by ward, reported from 12 January to 15 March 2022 in Isiolo county, Kenya (n=53).As of 15 March, samples were collected from 34 suspected cases (64%), and were tested for yellow fever at the national laboratory - Kenya Medical Research Institute - through reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and IgM antibodies by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Two samples (6%) were found to be positive by RT-PCR, and six (18%) were positive for IgM antibodies by ELISA. On 8 March 2022, the samples were shipped to the yellow fever regional reference laboratory - Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) - for confirmatory testing. At the point of writing this report, confirmation is still pending, and there is uncertainty around current laboratory results due to the presence of malaria positivities amongst the samples tested (n=5; 15%).There is no information on the vaccination status of the reported cases, however, Isiolo and the surrounding counties have no history of yellow fever vaccination campaigns. Kenya has not conducted large-scale preventive mass vaccination campaigns, and yellow fever vaccination is included into the national routine immunization schedule (i.e. for children at 9 months) only in four counties in the northwest of the country (not directly bordering Isiolo) deemed to be at highest risk. According to WHO-UNICEF, at the national level, the overall estimated coverage through routine immunization is 7% of the target population. This is far below the recommended 80% population coverage to provide herd immunity against outbreaks.Epidemiology of Yellow FeverYellow fever is an epidemic-prone mosquito-borne vaccine preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes.Forty-seven countries in Africa (34) and Central and South America (13) are either endemic for, or have regions that are endemic for, yellow fever. Since September 2021, nine countries in the WHO African Region (Cameroon, Chad, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Niger, Nigeria, and Republic of Congo) have reported human laboratory confirmed cases of yellow fever in areas that are at high risk for the disease and have a history of yellow fever transmission and outbreaks. These outbreaks are occurring in a large geographic area in the West and Central regions of Africa. These reports signal a resurgence and intensified transmission of the yellow fever virus. The outbreaks have included areas that have previously conducted large-scale mass vaccination campaigns but with persistent and growing gaps in immunity due to lack of sustained population immunity through routine immunization and/or secondary to population movements (newcomers without history of vaccination).The Government has implemented a national incident management structure to manage the outbreak and has developed a response plan, deploying a rapid response team to Isiolo and neighbouring counties to determine the extent of the outbreak, identify the at-risk population, conduct a risk assessment, initiate risk communication and community engagement activities and implement integrated vector control measures.The Government and the WHO, together with partners (UNICEF, Food and Agriculture Organization, Amref Health Africa, Kenya Red Cross, Living Goods, Médecins Sans Frontières, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, World Vision, Action Aid) mobilized resources to support response activities, including a proposed request to the International Coordinating Group for vaccine provision for reactive yellow fever vaccination in Isiolo with possible extension to any other counties found to have cases or have imminent risk.Kenya is endemic for yellow fever and is classified as a high-risk country in the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) Strategy. Previous outbreaks have been reported in 1992, 1993, 1995 and 2011 in the western part of the country (Rift Valley zone). In 2016, two imported cases from Angola were also reported. Epidemic spread of yellow fever is a risk in Kenya as the estimated routine yellow fever vaccination coverage is very low among the target population (7%) and is limited in scope to four counties in the western part of the country (Baringo, Elgeyo Marakwet, West Pokot and Turkana).Yellow fever has never been reported in Isiolo county, which is a pastoralist and remote area, around 270 km north of the capital Nairobi. The total population of Isiolo county was estimated at 268 002 in 2019 according to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. Although Isiolo is in the central region of Kenya and does not share international borders, it is marked by frequent population movements. Garba Tulla ward shares borders with South Wajir and Western Garissa counties that have been experiencing massive pastoralists movements, amplified by current drought conditions. There is also massive refugee migration from neighbouring Somalia into Garissa county, Kenya. A national park is also located in the area near Isiolo, and the presence of informal mining activities attracting large numbers of workers as well as the presence of non-human primates has been noted, underlying the potential risk of spread to other areas.Considering the above-described scenario, the risk is assessed as high at the national and regional levels, and low at the global level.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and review the risk assessment based on the latest available information.Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries and the risk of onward spread. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended.Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever. Review of the risk analysis and scope of immunization activities to protect the population could help avert the risk of future outbreaks.Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites including the use of repellents and insecticide treated mosquito nets. The highest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening.Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Viraemic returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present.International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Kenya. Yellow fever vaccination is required by national authorities for international travellers over one year of age entering Kenya, and it is recommended by WHO for travellers aged 9 months or over, except for those whose itineraries are limited to the following areas: the entire North Eastern Province, the States of Kilifi, Kwale, Lamu, Malindi and Tanariver in Coastal Province, and the cities of Nairobi and Mombasa.In accordance with the IHR (2005) third edition, the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever becomes valid 10 days after vaccination and the validity extends throughout the life of the person vaccinated. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.We would like to acknowledge the National Authorities of Kenya for the information provided to enable the publication of this Disease Outbreak News.Citable reference: World Health Organization (25 March 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Yellow Fever - Kenya. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/yellow-fever-kenyaOutbreak at a glanceThe World Health Organisation (WHO) was notified on 4 February 2022 of an unusually high number of cases of extensively drug-resistant (XDR) Shigella sonnei which have been reported in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and several other countries in the WHO European Region since late 2021. Although most infections with S. sonnei result in a short duration of disease and low case fatality, multi-drug resistant (MDR) and XDR shigellosis is a public health concern since treatment options are very limited for moderate to severe cases.Situation in the United KingdomThe United Kingdom is currently investigating a cluster of 84 cases of XDR S. sonnei, with the dates of sample collection between 4 September 2021 and 1 March 2022. This compares to 16 cases, none of which were XDR, in a 17-month period between 1 April 2020 and 31 August 2021, although case notification rates during this time may have been underestimated due to the COVID-19 pandemic control measures. Cases from the investigated cluster are distributed across all regions of England, Scotland and Northern Ireland.Figure 1. Epidemic curve of extensively drug-resistant Shigella sonnei cases reported in England, the United Kingdom between 4 September 2021 and 1 March 2022, by date of sample collection*This epidemic curve excludes eight cases which were reported from areas in the United Kingdom outside of England. The data should be interpreted with due consideration for care-seeking, testing and reporting practices.During investigations, 37 cases were interviewed, of which 46% (17/37) attended emergency services and 24% (9/37) were hospitalized. Direct, person-to-person transmission including sexual transmission between men who have sex with men (MSM) was identified as the most frequently reported route of transmission among the interviewed cases. All 37 cases were reported to be non-susceptible to various types of antibiotics (penicillin, third generation cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, tetracycline, sulphonamides, quinolones and azithromycin), leaving very limited treatment options for severe cases.Situation in other countries in the WHO European RegionAs of 17 March 2022, at least nine additional countries in the European Region have reported cases of S. sonnei, including some cases infected with XDR S. sonnei. These cases show a resistance profile similar to that reported in the United Kingdom (Figure 2, Table 1).Figure 2. Countries in the WHO European Region which have reported extensively drug-resistant Shigella sonnei in 2020-2022 as of 17 March 2022Table 1. Reports of extensively drug-resistant Shigella sonnei from countries in WHO European Region in 2020-2022, excluding the United Kingdom, as of 7 March 2022Epidemiology of ShigellosisShigellosis is a gastrointestinal infection caused by one of four species of Shigella bacteria, including S. sonnei. It is a virulent pathogen with a very low infective dose, which means that only a small number of bacteria, approximately 10 to 100 organisms, is sufficient to cause disease. Humans are the only known reservoir and can excrete bacteria in stool for weeks after bloody diarrhoea.Shigella is found in the intestinal tract of infected people and can be transmitted through the faecal-oral route by person-to-person contact, contact with faeces from an infected person, or indirect contact such as by flies, fomites, consumption of contaminated food or water. Asymptomatic carriers can also transmit the disease. Sustained sexual transmission has become an important transmission route for shigellosis.The most common symptoms associated with S. sonnei infections include: watery or bloody diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramps, fever, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, headache and malaise. While most infections with S. sonnei result in a short duration of disease, with recovery within a week and low case fatality rate, this is not always the prognosis for immunocompromised cases and complications can occur. Moderate to severe infection is typically treated with antibiotics, however with the growing incidence of MDR and XDR Shigella globally, treatment options become increasingly limited. Cases of XDR S. sonnei have been reported previously in Australia and the United States of America.Shigellosis is endemic in most low- or middle-income countries (LMICs) and is a major cause of bloody diarrhoea worldwide. Each year, it is estimated to cause at least 80 million cases of bloody diarrhoea and 700 000 deaths. Almost all (99%) Shigella infections occur in LMICs, and the majority of cases (~70%), and of deaths (~60%), occur among children less than five years of age. It is estimated that <1% of cases are treated in the hospital.  National health authorities are conducting epidemiological and genomic investigations in their respective countries to determine the route of transmission and the genomic linkage of the cases with the representative strain of the cluster detected in the United Kingdom.WHO has communicated to national authorities to report cases or clusters of drug-resistant S. sonnei using Global Antimicrobial Resistance Emerging Antimicrobial Resistance Reporting component (GLASS EAR), and to share this information with relevant services and clinics dealing with sexual transmitted infections.  Based on the limited information available at this stage, the likelihood of spread from the United Kingdom to other countries and the prevalence of XDR S. sonnei is high. Some findings from case interviews suggest possible exposure in other countries. Authorities in the United Kingdom are investigating cases in other countries that may be linked to the same cluster.   The risk of spread of this particular strain of S. sonnei among the general population and the proportion of secondary cases among non-high-risk groups is unknown.The recent increase in S. sonnei infections in the United Kingdom may represent an increase in reporting activities following the COVID-19 pandemic and resumption of social contact, especially in MSM exposed to high-risk sexual practices and in immunocompromised adults. This outbreak may represent a serious public health impact because the pathogen is XDR and the number of cases is unusually above previously reported numbers in the United Kingdom in 2020-2021. In addition, the mechanism of antimicrobial resistance by which this S. sonnei strain has gained XDR characteristics is unusual and bacteria with this type of resistance mechanism have not been frequently reported in the United Kingdom recently. Currently, phenotypic data and Whole Genomic Sequencing (WGS) data from isolates is limited, which challenges the characterization and tracking of the event.Thus far, cases have only been reported in countries with high surveillance capacity and high water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) standards. However, the long carriage of Shigella bacteria post-infection, the potential role of asymptomatic carriers, and the very low infective dose are factors that could enable spread of the XDR strains globally. If XDR S. sonnei is introduced to resource limited countries where WASH conditions are suboptimal, there is a risk for a major diarrhoeal disease outbreak with potentially a high case fatality rate, including among children.    Prevention: General hygiene measures including handwashing with soap and water are important for reducing transmission of Shigella. Prevention of bloody diarrhoea caused by Shigella relies primarily on measures that prevents spread of the bacteria within the community, including person-to-person transmission. These include hand washing with soap, ensuring the availability of safe drinking water, safely disposing of human waste, breastfeeding of infants and young children, safe handling and processing of food, and controlling houseflies.Symptomatic individuals are recommended to avoid sexual contact to reduce transmission.Treatment: For moderate to severe cases of non-resistant shigellosis, antibiotic therapy is recommended. Clinical improvement can be expected within 48 hours of antibiotic therapy for non-drug resistant shigella, which results in a decreased risk of serious complications and death, shorter duration of symptoms, the elimination of Shigella from the stool, lowering the probability of onward transmission. Enhanced surveillance: The geographical spread of XDR S. sonnei is under reported. WHO advises national authorities to reinforce Shigella surveillance including testing for antimicrobial resistance to detect potential introductions to new areas and to prevent the establishment of local cycles of transmission in communities.  This outbreak highlights the importance of public health measures to detect, prevent and control the spread of drug-resistant pathogens within and across countries.  Acknowledgement: We would like to acknowledge the National Authorities for the information provided to enable the publication of this Disease Outbreak News.Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 March 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Extensively drug-resistant Shigella sonnei infections - Europe. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/extensively-drug-resistant-shigella-sonnei-infections---europe  Outbreak at a glanceWHO was notified of an outbreak of Lassa fever in Togo following the confirmation of a case on 26 February 2022. Active case finding, and contact tracing was conducted. The risk of transmission for this outbreak is assessed as low at the national and regional level given the experience of national authorities with past outbreaks and the cross-border communication with neighboring countries.Description of outbreakOn 26 February 2022, the national authorities in Togo notified WHO of an outbreak of Lassa fever after a case, a 35-year-old female, from Takpamba town, Oti-South district, Savanes region was laboratory confirmed.  The town borders Ghana and is located 96 kilometres from Dapaong - the capital city of the Savanes region. The case was previously living in a village in the Save commune in Benin, four kilometers from the Nigerian border, and arrived in Takpamba town, Togo, on 4 February prior to their symptom onset.  On 11 February, the case developed symptoms including fever, abdominal pain and cough, and consulted the local health care facility on 14 February.  Following three days of oral treatment and no improvement, the case was taken to another health centre where she was hospitalised  for 24 hours and was later referred to a hospital where she was managed as an outpatient. On 22 February, the case returned to the previously visited hospital following persistence of symptoms as well as having developed vomiting and bloody diarrhea. As a result of her clinical picture, Lassa fever was suspected, and the individual was isolated and notified to the health authorities.  A sample was taken for laboratory analysis at the National Institute of Hygiene, Togo, and tested positive for Lassa fever on 26 February. The case died the same day, and a safe and dignified burial was performed. A total of 26 contacts were identified from two health districts of the Savanes region, including 10 health care workers, one of which was symptomatic and isolated. The symptomatic health care worker was exposed through direct contact with the case but upon testing was negative for Lassa fever.  As of 23 March, all contacts have completed the follow-up period, and none developed Lassa fever.No outbreak has been reported from Benin or Ghana associated with this reported outbreak in Togo. There is an ongoing outbreak in Nigeria (for more details, please see the Disease outbreak news published on Lassa fever in Nigeria on 14 February 2022) , however, no epidemiological links have been elucidated as part of this investigation.Figure-1. Confirmed case of Lassa fever in Togo, bordering Ghana and BeninEpidemiology of Lassa feverLassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic fever that is primarily transmitted to humans through direct or indirect contact with food or household items contaminated with infected Mastomys rodents’ urine or faeces. Though to a lesser extent, person-to-person infections can occur during the acute febrile phase through virus particles present in blood and bodily fluids of the infected person. This includes transmission in the health care facility and laboratory; thus, health care workers should be among the risk groups targeted for prevention. Overall, the case fatality ratio is around 15% among hospitalized patients with severe presentation.The incubation period of Lassa fever ranges from 6 to 21 days. The onset of the disease, when symptomatic, is gradual, starting with fever, general weakness, and malaise. After a few days, headache, sore throat, muscle pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, cough, and abdominal pain may follow. In severe cases, facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, bleeding from the mouth, nose, vagina or gastrointestinal tract and low blood pressure may develop.The antiviral drug, ribavirin has been given as treatment for Lassa fever in recent years, however, recent systematic reviews showed there is no strong evidence about the efficacy of ribavirin treatment on the outcome of patients with Lassa fever as well as optimal dosing regimens, highlighting the need for further research, particularly in the form of randomized clinical trials. Therefore, if the decision is to use ribavirin, it should be made under clinical trial protocol to evaluate safety and efficacy of the drug and the dosage. There is currently no approved vaccine for Lassa fever, however, optimized supportive care provided as early as possible with rehydration and symptomatic treatment can increase the chance of survival.Lassa fever is endemic in West Africa with cases frequently reported from Benin, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria and Sierra Leone. Togo is affected to a lesser extent, however, since 2016, outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in the country every few years.  Notable Lassa fever outbreaks have occurred in Togo in 2016, 2017, and the most recent was in January 2019 when two imported cases from Nigeria were reported in the Central and Kara regions of Togo. No further cases were identified, and the Ministry of Health declared an end to the outbreak in February 2019.Outbreaks of Lassa fever in Togo have involved importation and exportation of cases at various times to nearby countries requiring the need for cross-border communication. In both endemic regions and areas with sporadic cases in West Africa, the majority of cases are reported during the dry season from December to April.WHO is supporting the response activities in the country and assisted in conducting the safe and dignified burial of the patient.Active case-finding and contact tracing activities are ongoing at the household and the affected health facilities. If contacts experience any Lassa fever symptoms, case management teams have been trained to ensure that these suspected cases receive adequate care in a dedicated ward.Other response measures undertaken include sensitization of health care workers, taking stock inventory of ribavirin, preparing a minimum capacity for case management at district level, providing risk communication messages to the public, and reinforcing infection prevention and control measures in health facilities.The country has proven to have adequate response capacity to Lassa fever outbreaks in the past, however, several challenges including lack of resources for case management such as insufficient number of isolation rooms, stock shortages of antiviral treatment and supportive therapy, lack of reinforcement of infection prevention and control measures in health facilities, as well as delays in sample testing turnaround times have been noted in the country during the current outbreak.Additionally, the borders are very porous in this area with constant cross-border movement which poses a risk for transmission to neighbouring countries. However, given the management of past outbreaks and the experience with cross-border communication between national health ministries regarding Lassa fever outbreaks, the risk of transmission remains low at the national and regional level.Prevention: Prevention of Lassa fever in endemic countries relies on community engagement and promoting hygienic conditions to discourage rodents from entering homes. Family members and health care workers should always be careful to avoid contact with blood and body fluids while caring for sick individuals.Infection prevention and control: International travel and trade:  Citable reference: World Health Organization (24 March 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Lassa fever – Togo. Available at:https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/disease-outbreak-news-lassa-fever-togoOn 17 February 2022, WHO received an update regarding the detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) in Malawi which was previously notified on 31 January 2022 through an IHR notification as a case of poliovirus type 2 (PV2). The case, a child under 5 years old, from Central constituency, Lilongwe district, Central Region, developed acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) on 19 November 2021. Two stool specimens were collected for testing on 26 and 27 November, and were received at the Regional Reference Laboratory, the National Institute of Communicable Disease (NICD) in South Africa, on 14 January 2022, and then forwarded to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC).Sequencing of the virus conducted by the NICD on 2 February, and the US CDC on 12 February confirmed this case as WPV1. Analysis shows that the current WPV1 isolate in Malawi is genetically linked to a Pakistan sequence detected in 2020 in Sindh province.Polio is a highly infectious disease, caused by a virus that invades the nervous system and can cause permanent paralysis (approximately one in 200 infections) or death (approximately 2-10% of paralyzed cases). The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the faecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (for example, contaminated water or food).Two of the three types of wild poliovirus have been eradicated (WPV2 and WPV3), with ongoing global efforts to eradicate WPV1. Currently, wild poliovirus is endemic in two countries: Pakistan and Afghanistan.                              The detection of WPV1 outside the two countries where the disease is endemic demonstrates the continuous risk of international spread of the disease until every corner of the world is free of WPV1.The risk at the national level in Malawi is assessed as high given the presence of high population density, low vaccination coverage (<80%) in many districts and lack of a catch-up campaign for more than six years, accumulated susceptible populations, suboptimal AFP surveillance, and lack of environmental surveillance, that may be affecting the ability to ascertain cases. Furthermore, the switch from the trivalent Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) to bivalent OPV in Malawi was completed on 25 April 2016, and Inactivated Polio Vaccine (IPV) was introduced on 14 December 2018. The most recent supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with a vaccine containing type 2 vaccine were conducted in 2013.Additionally, the country is currently affected by tropical storm Ana which may impact the country’s response capacity by impairing Polio SIAs and surveillance activities. According to the UN flash update on Malawi tropical storm Ana, as of 11 February, there have been 995 072 people affected in 19 districts, 206 people injured, 46 people reported dead, and 18 people are reported still missing. The United Nations and partners are supporting the life-saving emergency flood responseThe risk at the regional level is assessed as moderate given the significant population movement between Mozambique and Malawi, suboptimal vaccination coverage in the neighbouring countries, and suboptimal AFP surveillance activities.The risk at the global level is assessed as low given the existing response capacity in place and the moderately high global Polio coverage estimates.It is important that all countries, particularly those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen the surveillance of AFP cases to rapidly detect any new poliovirus importations and to facilitate a rapid response.Under the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR), countries must investigate and notify any poliovirus isolate, whether the isolate is from AFP cases, AFP contacts or environmental surveillance. Local health authorities should initiate the investigation within 24 hours of a poliovirus isolate being reported.Isolation of poliovirus in a previously non-infected area represents an event or outbreak that requires national authorities to complete an immediate risk assessment to inform the type and scale of response. Following initial investigation and risk assessment, national authorities must continue to collect detailed information to update the situation analysis and risk assessment (i.e. results from laboratory investigations, or detailed information on affected communities, etc.). Neighbouring countries/regions must also continue to update their risk assessment with support from WHO regional offices.Countries, territories, and areas should also maintain systematically high routine immunization coverage rates (>90%) both at national and subnational levels to minimize the consequences of any new poliovirus introduction. WHO recommends that two high-quality large-scale vaccination campaigns (>90% of children vaccinated) should be completed within eight weeks of laboratory sequencing results. A mop-up round might be required as an additional step wherever monitoring suggests children have been missed in certain health districts or areas, to ensure interruption of transmission (even in the absence of new poliovirus detections). Communication and social mobilization activities should be an integrated part of reactive Polio immunization campaigns.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and/or trade to Malawi based on the information available for this current event. WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within four weeks to 12 months of travel.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts to limit the international spread of poliovirus remain a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).  Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, consider vaccination of all international travelers, ensure such travelers are provided with an international certificate of vaccination, restrict at the point of departure the international travel of any resident lacking documentation of appropriate polio vaccination, intensify cross-border efforts to substantially increase vaccination coverage of travelers, and intensify efforts to increase routine immunization coverage.   Citable reference: World Health Organization (03 March 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) – Malawi. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/wild-poliovirus-type-1-(WPV1)-malawiOn 9 February 2022, WHO was notified by the United Kingdom health authorities of two laboratory confirmed cases and one probable case of Lassa fever. As of 18 February, three cases have been confirmed and one death has been reported. These are the first reported Lassa fever cases in the United Kingdom since 2009, and represents the second known case of secondary transmission of Lassa fever in Europe.The first case travelled to Mali in late 2021, where Lassa fever is endemic. After returning to the United Kingdom, the individual developed symptoms of fever, fatigue and loose stool, and was subsequently hospitalized. The first case has now recovered. The second and third cases were family members of the first case and did not travel to Mali. Both were admitted to the hospital and the third case has sadly died.On 8 February, samples from both the first and second cases were laboratory confirmed positive for Lassa virus by PCR. The third case was initially provided care as a probable case of Lassa fever and the diagnosis was confirmed on 9 February.Incident responses have been activated by health authorities in the United Kingdom to coordinate the clinical and public health management of these cases.People with exposure to the cases were identified through robust contact tracing activities. Low and high risk contacts are being followed up for 21 days after their last exposure. Post-exposure prophylaxis has been offered to high-risk contacts with the most significant exposures. Systems are in place to assess and manage any contacts who may develop symptoms during the follow up period.Lassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic fever illness that is primarily transmitted to humans via contact with food or household items contaminated with infected Mastomys rats’ urine or faeces. Human-to-human transmission is rare but can occur through direct contact with the blood, urine, faeces, or other bodily secretions, particularly in health care settings. It can cause severe disease in about 20% of patients. The case fatality ratio (CFR) is 1% overall and 15% in severely ill patients. Early recognition and initiation of patient care decrease the CFR and public health impact.Lassa fever is endemic in Mali and sporadic cases have been exported to Europe from countries in West Africa where the disease is endemic, such as Sierra Leone, Togo, Liberia and Nigeria in recent years. However, the secondary transmission of Lassa fever through human contacts is known to be extremely rare when appropriate infection prevention and control precautions and laboratory biosafety measures are applied. The only secondary transmission of Lassa fever reported in Europe was in 2016 from Germany, when the secondary case performed post-mortem care of a fatal case.Human-to-human transmission occurs in both community and health care settings, where the virus may be spread by contaminated medical equipment, such as reused needles, as well as direct contact with bodily secretions. Health care workers are at risk if caring for Lassa fever patients in the absence of appropriate infection prevention and control (IPC) practices, although information from recent imported cases in Europe show that secondary transmission of Lassa virus is rare when standard IPC precautions are followed. The possibility of additional secondary cases related to transmission in a health care setting cannot currently be excluded, but is considered very unlikely in the community.Prevention of Lassa fever in endemic countries relies on community engagement and promoting hygienic conditions to discourage rodents from entering homes. Family members and health care workers should always be careful to avoid contact with blood and body fluids while caring for sick individuals.In health care settings, staff should consistently implement standard IPC measures when caring for patients to prevent nosocomial infections. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Lassa virus, or handling their clinical specimens, should reinforce standard and contact precautions, comprising appropriate hand hygiene, rational use of personal protective equipment (PPE), environmental cleaning, isolation, safe injections practices and safe burial practices. In order to avoid any direct contact with blood and body fluids and/or splashes onto facial mucosa (eyes, nose, mouth) when providing direct care for a patient with suspected or confirmed Lassa virus, personal protective equipment should include: 1) clean non-sterile gloves; 2) clean, non-sterile fluid resistant gown; and 3) protection of facial mucosa against splashes (mask and eye protection, or a face shield).Given the nonspecific presentation of viral haemorrhagic fevers, isolation of ill travellers and consistent implementation of standard and contact precautions is key to preventing secondary transmission. When consistently applied, these measures can prevent secondary transmission even if travel history information is not obtained, not immediately available, or the diagnosis of a viral haemorrhagic fever is delayed.There is currently no approved vaccine. Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment improves survival.Considering the seasonal increases of cases between December and March, countries in West Africa that have endemic Lassa fever are encouraged to strengthen their related surveillance systems to enhance early detection and treatment of cases, and to reduce the case fatality rate, as well as to strengthen cross border collaboration.  Citable reference: World Health Organization (21 February 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Lassa fever – United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/lassa-fever-united-kingdom-of-great-britain-and-northern-ireland In Nigeria, from 3 to 30 January 2022, 211 laboratory confirmed Lassa fever cases including 40 deaths (case fatality ratio: 19%) have been cumulatively reported in 14 of the 36 Nigerian states and the Federal Capital Territory across the country (Figure 1). Three states account for 82% of confirmed cases: Ondo (63), Edo (57) and Bauchi (53). The other states affected are Benue (11), Ebonyi (5), Oyo (5), Taraba (5), Kogi (4), Enugu (2), Kaduna (2), Cross River (1), Delta (1), Katsina (1) and Plateau (1) (Figure 2).

Of the 211 laboratory confirmed cases, five cases have been reported among health workers in two states, Edo (3) and Benue (2).Figure 1. Weekly number of reported confirmed Lassa Fever cases and deaths in Nigeria during the epidemiological weeks one (commencing 2 January) through four (commencing 23 January) in 2022. In contrast, noticeably less Lassa fever cases with less geographical spread were reported for the same period (epidemiological weeks 1- 4) in 2021 (54 confirmed cases, including 12 deaths, from 8 States).Lassa fever is endemic in Nigeria and the annual peak of Lassa fever cases is typically observed during the dry season (December–April). Thus, the number of infections is expected to rise further until the end of the dry season.While endemic in Nigeria, cases are much higher than the previous epidemic seasons. This could be attributed to reduced response capacity in surveillance and laboratory testing. It is necessary to continue to monitor the annual peaks of Lassa fever in order to contextualize incidence and inform the effective management of Lassa fever. Figure 2. Confirmed cases of Lassa fever by States reported in Nigeria from 3 – 30 January 2022 Lassa fever is a viral haemorrhagic fever that is primarily transmitted to humans via contact with food or household items contaminated with urine or faeces from Mastomys rats. Though to a lesser extent, secondary human-to-human transmission can also occur through direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other body fluids of infected persons, especially in health-care settings.As aforementioned, the peak of Lassa fever cases in humans typically occurs in the dry season (December-April) and follows the reproduction cycle of the Mastomys rats in the wet season (May – November). Given that 90-95% of human infections are due to indirect exposure (through food or household items contaminated by infected rats’ excreta) or direct contact with infected Mastomys rats, the very high density and high circulation of Lassa fever virus in the rat population poses a risk for further human infection during the dry season.Approximately 80% of Lassa virus infections in humans are either asymptomatic or mild, however, infection in the remaining 20% manifests as a febrile illness of variable severity associated with multiple organ dysfunctions with or without haemorrhage. The overall case fatality ratio among all infected people is approximately 1% but is significantly higher among patients hospitalized with severe illness (around 15%).Timely diagnosis results in more rapid isolation of patients and provision of treatment, while also reducing the risk of person-to-person transmission in health care settings. Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment improves survival of patients.The current overall risk is considered high at national level. While Lassa fever is endemic in Nigeria and the country has developed an increased capacity for the prevention and control of Lassa fever outbreaks, including strengthened surveillance, diagnostic and treatment capacity, several factors contribute to the current elevated risk level. These include an increase in the number of confirmed cases compared to previous epidemic seasons, gaps in surveillance and varying degrees of subnational response capacity, delays in sample shipment for laboratory testing, a decrease of case management capacity due to conversion of dedicated Lassa fever facilities into COVID-19 health-care facilities and suboptimal IPC procedures. These factors combined warrant the need for further improvement and support of the country’s capacity to detect and respond to Lassa fever outbreaks. In addition, the five confirmed cases among health workers, which included two workers caring for the same patient in the emergency ward, further emphasizes the urgent need to strengthen IPC measures.The overall regional and global risk is considered low due to minimal cross-border transmission from Nigeria to neighbouring countries. Lassa fever is known to be endemic in West African countries, primarily in Sierra Leone, Guinea, Liberia and Nigeria, but may exist in other countries in the same region. Mastomys rats are the main reservoir for Lassa virus and so abundant in endemic areas in West Africa that it is not possible to eliminate them from the environment. Prevention of Lassa fever relies on promoting good “community hygiene” to discourage rodents from entering homes. Effective measures include storing grain and other foodstuffs in rodent-proof containers, disposing of waste far from the home, maintaining clean households and considering keeping cats. Precaution should be taken when handling Mastomys rats.  All animal products should be thoroughly cooked.Those caring for affected persons should be careful and avoid contact with blood and body fluids.In health-care settings, health workers and volunteers should apply standard infection prevention and control (IPC) measures when caring for individuals, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment (to block splashes or other contact with infected materials) and safe injection practices.Health workers caring for those with suspected or confirmed Lassa fever should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the person’s blood, body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. When in close contact (within 1 meter) of individuals with Lassa fever, health workers should wear face protection (a face shield or a medical mask and goggles), a clean, non-sterile long-sleeved gown, and gloves (sterile gloves for some procedures).Personnel working in laboratories are also at risk. Samples taken from suspected Lassa fever cases for diagnostics should be handled by trained staff and processed in suitably equipped laboratories under maximum biological containment conditions.WHO continues to advise all countries endemic for Lassa fever on the need to enhance early detection and treatment of cases to reduce the case fatality rate.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Nigeria and the affected areas based on the currently available information.   Citable reference: World Health Organization (14 February 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Lassa Fever-Nigeria. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/lassa-fever---nigeria Measles is endemic in Afghanistan, with almost all provinces reporting suspected cases every year. Following periods of lower transmission in 2019 and 2020, and amid the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, weekly notifications of suspected measles cases have been increasing in all provinces since the end of July 2021, with the highest weekly toll observed in the last four weeks in January 2022 (Figure 1). The number of cases and deaths increased by 18% and 40% respectively from week 4, 2022 (week commencing January 24) to week 5, 2022 (week commencing January 31).Figure 1. Weekly number of reported suspected measles cases in Afghanistan. Week 1, 2018 to week 4, 2022. Source: WHO Country Office in Afghanistan, WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.From 1 January 2021 to 29 January 2022, 35 319 suspected measles cases were reported in Afghanistan, of which 3221 (9%) were laboratory-confirmed by IgM-ELISA in the seven reference laboratories (one national and six regional). Most of the suspected measles cases (91%) occurred among children less than 5 years of age. During the same period, 156 measles deaths were reported among the confirmed cases (CFR=4.8%), with more than 97% of the fatalities registered among children less than 5 years of age. Although the number of deaths is relatively low, the rapid rise in cases suggests that the trend of reported deaths will continue to increase sharply in the coming weeks.The most affected provinces, with the highest number of reported cases (confirmed and suspected) are Balkh, Ghazni, Helmand, Kandahar, Kabul, Paktika, and Paktya. Figure 2 shows the measles notification rate (confirmed and suspected cases) per million population. The highest rates were observed in Paktya (617 cases per 1 000 000), Balkh (275 cases per 1 000 000), Kunduz (204 cases per 1 000 000) Zabul (168 cases per 1 000 000), Kandahar (145 cases per 1 000 000), Logar (127 cases per 1 000 000).Figure 2. Number of reported measles cases (confirmed and suspected) per million population by province, Afghanistan, January 2021 - January 2022. Source: WHO Country Office in Afghanistan, WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.Measles is a very highly contagious, vaccine-preventable disease caused by a virus that is transmitted by air and through direct contact with infected cases. Unvaccinated young children are at the highest risk of measles and its complications (e.g. pneumonia and encephalitis), including death. Measles outbreaks can result in epidemics with a high case fatality rate, especially among young, malnourished children.Afghanistan is considered a fragile, conflict-affected and vulnerable setting. The country has faced years of compounded crises, under-investment, instability and drought, and has now the highest number of people in emergency food insecurity in the world. According to UNICEF, 14 million people in Afghanistan are facing acute food insecurity, and an estimated 3.2 million children under five years suffer from acute malnutrition.The large and widespread outbreaks and the increasing number of reported measles cases in Afghanistan, is due to a variety of complex factors that on the one hand have resulted in the low immunization coverage of both first dose of measles-containing vaccine (MCV1) and second dose (MCV2), on the other has exacerbated the impact of the outbreak (e.g. high levels of acute malnutrition, winter conditions and crowded domestic situation, previous displacement). The 2020 WHO/UNICEF national immunization coverage estimates were 66% for MCV1 and 43% for MCV2. At the sub-national level, administrative coverage data shows that six provinces achieved less than 50% MCV1 coverage (Kandahar 40%; Paktya 38%; Jozjan 37%; Khost 36%; Helmand 18%; Urozgan 3.1%). The internal displacement of 698 000 people in 2021 was another driver of low MCV coverage. Internally displaced persons (IDPs) frequently live in conditions that increase susceptibility to measles (e.g. through less access to immunization services) and may increase measles exposures (e.g. through over-crowding) as well as experiencing poor health outcomes (e.g. due to factors like increasing risk and rates of malnutrition, poor access to curative services). Cross-border travel due to the recent instability in Afghanistan has increased the risk of international spread, particularly in Pakistan and Iran.Overall risk at the national level is assessed as very high due to:The regional risk is considered moderate due to the movement of people to Tajikistan, Iran and Pakistan, while at the global level the risk is considered low due to moderately high global MCV coverage estimates. More information is required from neighbouring countries and continued monitoring of displacement trends.Two-dose measles vaccination coverage of at least 95% in every province is recommended to ensure immunity. Strengthening routine immunization and conducting outbreak response immunization campaigns are essential for effective control of the epidemic and reducing mortality.The administration of vitamin A, particularly in the context of malnutrition, is critical to reducing morbidity and mortality. Other essential measles prevention and response interventions, include:   Citable reference: World Health Organization (10 February 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Measles – Afghanistan. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/measles-afghanistan Timor-Leste has reported a surge of dengue cases since late 2021, at unusually high levels compared to previous years. There were 1451 reported cases and 10 deaths (CFR 0.7%) in 2020 and 901 cases and 11 deaths (CFR 1.2%) in 2021. In January 2022 alone 1286 cases were reported, of which 790 (61.4%) were children under the age of 14 years, 142 were severe dengue cases and 20 fatalities were reported (case fatality ratio 1.6%). The majority of the cases who presented to the hospital were diagnosed based on the clinical signs and symptoms. Dili municipality, which includes the capital city of Timor-Leste, reported the highest number of cases (857 cases 66.6%), followed by Manatuto municipality (92, 7.2%). Dengue is endemic in Timor-Leste year-round, with peak transmission reported from December to April during the hottest months of the year (Figure 1). The ongoing monsoon season may increase mosquito density and the likelihood of further transmission of dengue in the next few months.  In previous outbreaks between 2005 and 2012, two co-circulating serotypes, dengue virus 1 (DENV-1) and dengue virus 3 (DENV-3), were reported. Information on circulating serotypes has not been available since 2012.Figure 1. Dengue cases reported in Timor-Leste, 1 January 2016 - 31 January 2022Source: WHO Country Office in Timor-Leste, WHO Regional Office for South-East AsiaThe Ministry of Health has undertaken several response activities including: Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection that is caused by four DENV serotypes (DENV 1, DENV 2, DENV 3 and DENV 4). Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are widely adapted vectors for urban and peri-urban environments. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes. Sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue.Although dengue in Timor-Leste is not unexpected, the significant daily increase in the number of dengue cases and the rate of hospitalization in the current outbreak are unusual. The number of reported cases between 1 December 2021 to 31 January 2022 is substantially higher compared to the same periods in previous years since 2016. As dengue is endemic in Timor-Leste, the population may be at risk of secondary infection and possible serious complications if not treated promptly and adequately. There is no specific treatment for dengue. Early recognition of dengue virus infection and appropriate clinical management can reduce the severity of disease and mortality among dengue cases. Given the limited health care capacity in-country, poor access to health care, and COVID-19 and other diseases pressuring health capacity, there is a high risk of serious health impacts and an increased number of severe and fatal dengue cases. Co-infections with SARS-CoV-2 and DENV can also be expected.Due to strict international travel restrictions in response to COVID-19, cross-border movement of people is limited. However, international spread by vectors or asymptomatic travellers cannot be ruled out because Timor-Leste shares a land border with Indonesia where dengue is also endemic and the primary vectors are present. This outbreak underscores the need for improved vector surveillance, enhanced laboratory capacity for better detection, increased bed capacity in hospitals, sensitized health care providers on case management and improved surveillance of acute febrile illness to better assess disease burden and seasonality patterns. Establishing sentinel sites for systematically testing and subtyping dengue virus will support the detection and response to dengue in affected areas.The prevention and control of dengue depends on effective vector control. WHO promotes the strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including Aedes subspecies, for larvae and adult mosquitoes. Enhanced IVM involves removing potential breeding sites, reducing vector populations, and minimizing individual exposure (i.e., environmental management and source reduction, and chemical control measures). Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is human-vector contact such as residences, workplaces, schools and hospitals. Vector control activities can include covering, draining and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis, as well as chlorination and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage. Community-led cleaning activities should be encouraged involving community groups, students, religious groups among others. Space spraying with insecticide can be deployed as an emergency measure.Although dengue is not spread from person to person, mosquitoes can become infected after it bites someone with DENV. This cycle, therefore, makes the infected mosquito capable of spreading dengue within the household and the neighbourhood leading to clusters of cases. During outdoor activities, mosquito repellents may be applied to exposed skin or to clothing.  While indoors, WHO recommends the use of mosquito repellents, household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Using window and door screens and air conditioning can also reduce bites.WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied on Timor-Leste based on the information available for this event.  Citable referenceWorld Health Organization (4 February 2022). Disease Outbreak News; Dengue – Timor-Leste. Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/dengue---timor-lesteCholera is endemic in Benin with cases reported annually since 2016. In 2021, Benin reported its first epidemic wave of cholera between March and April, in the commune of So-Ava, Atlantique Department, with 103 cases including three laboratory-confirmed cases and no deaths.   A second epidemic wave began in September 2021, with 1430 cases and 20 deaths (CFR: 1.4 %) reported from 1 September 2021 to 16 January 2022. Of these, stool culture performed on 41 samples at the National Laboratory, Benin, were confirmed as Vibrio cholerae O1 serogroup.Of the cases reported during the second wave, 53% (n=758) were females and 62% (n=887) were between the ages of 16 and 45 years. Cases have been reported from nine departments in Benin including Alibori, Atacora, Atlantique, Borgou, Collines, Donga, Littoral, Mono and Oueme. Borgou department, the epicenter of the outbreak, reported an increase in cholera cases from week 43 (ending on 31 October) to week 50 (ending on 12 December), with 841 cases reported, of which 71% of cases (n=597) were reported from Parakou district.CoordinationMonitoringLaboratory and case managementWater, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)Risk CommunicationLogisticsCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by the ingestion of V. cholerae bacteria in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation. It is a potentially serious infectious disease that can cause high morbidity and mortality, which can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting.Cholera is endemic in Benin and since 2016, cases continue to be reported every year in various departments across the country. The Parakou district in Borgou department is the epicenter of the current outbreak with high commercial traffic to Cotonou, the capital of Benin.The main factors attributed to the initiation and ongoing spread of the cholera epidemics in Benin include:Additionally, Benin shares international borders with Nigeria and Togo, and there is frequent and substantial cross-border population movement. This poses a risk of cross-border transmission of cholera.Given the porous borders with countries responding to cholera outbreaks and inadequate WASH conditions, the national and regional risks of this outbreak is assessed as high while the risk at the global level is considered to be low. WHO recommends improved access to safe drinking water and sanitation, good food safety and hygienic practices to prevent the transmission of cholera.Strengthening surveillance, particularly at the community level, is advised. Appropriate case management, including improved access to care, should be implemented in areas affected by the outbreak to reduce mortality. There is a need to ensure that countries are prepared to rapidly detect and respond to this cholera outbreak to reduce the risk of spread to new areas. As the outbreak is occurring in areas with active cross border population movement, WHO encourages the respective countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to and from Benin based on the information available on the current outbreak. On 6 January 2022, the International Health Regulations (IHR) Focal Point of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland notified WHO of the detection of a laboratory confirmed human case of avian influenza A(H5) from South West England.The case lived with a large number of domestically kept birds which had onset of illness on 18 December 2021, and subsequently tested positive with Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) by the United Kingdom National Reference Laboratory at the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) Weybridge laboratory.  As part of routine follow up of exposed persons to avian influenza cases, an upper respiratory swab was taken from the case on 24 December 2021 which tested positive for influenza A with subtyping H5. Further characterization of the virus is ongoing. This result was reproduced on two successive upper respiratory swabs collected during the following days. The case has remained clinically asymptomatic and is now considered to not be infectious.Following successful virus isolation from samples collected from birds on the infected premises, APHA analyzed full genome sequence data for the HPAI A(H5N1) virus present in these birds. Genomic analysis demonstrated that the sequence generated contained no strong correlates for specific increased affinity for humans. All contacts have been identified and managed according to the national public health protocols. None of the contacts have reported symptoms and no evidence of secondary transmission has been identified to date.The infected premises were visited by APHA personnel who completed culling of all the birds. Several measures including complete decontamination and cleaning of the outside of the property have been completed.A three-kilometer captive bird (monitoring) controlled zone was declared by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs around the infected premises. The zone will remain in place for at least 21 days following the completion of preliminary cleansing and disinfection and will not be lifted until surveillance activities including clinical inspections of all commercial premises in the zone have been undertaken. Since 2003, a total of 863 cases and 455 deaths of influenza A(H5N1) human infection have been reported worldwide, including this case in the United Kingdom. The most recently reported case in humans prior to the current case, was in October 2020 in Lao People's Democratic Republic in a one-year-old female who had exposure to backyard poultry (for more details, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 17 November 2020).  Since 1 October 2021, there have been 73 poultry cases and 471 detections in individual wild birds of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1)This is the first reported case of human infection of influenza A(H5) infection in the United Kingdom. The case remained clinically asymptomatic. The virus has not been detected beyond this single case. Public health measures from both the human and animal health agencies have been implemented. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low and for occupationally exposed persons it is considered to be low-to-moderate.  There are no specific vaccines for preventing Influenza A(H5N1) in humans. Candidate vaccines to prevent H5 infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes. Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses (human and poultry) and serological investigations are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health with timely sharing of such viruses and related information for risk assessment.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report (for more details, please see Case definitions for the four diseases requiring notification in all circumstances under the International Health Regulations (2005)).In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiological investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiological investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization.When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, people involved in specific high-risk activities such as sampling sick birds, culling and disposing of infected birds, eggs, litters and cleaning of contaminated premises should be trained on the proper use of and provided with appropriate personal protective equipment. All persons involved in these activities should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for seven days following the last day of contact with poultry or their environments.Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should also follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and/or trade with the United Kingdom based on the currently available information.In 2021, nine countries in the WHO African Region (Cameroon, Chad, Central African Republic (CAR), Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana, Niger, Nigeria, and Republic of Congo,) reported human laboratory confirmed cases of yellow fever (YF) in areas that are at high risk for the disease and have a history of YF transmission and outbreaks. These outbreaks are growing in case numbers, necessitating an urgent response.Since the beginning of 2021 and as of 20 December, there have been 300 probable and 88 laboratory confirmed cases of YF. Among the probable cases there have been 66 deaths reported from six countries (Ghana = 42; Cameroon = 8; Chad = 8; Nigeria = 4; Congo = 2; DRC = 2), the overall case fatality ratio (CFR) among the probable cases is 22%, with a very wide variation among countries e.g Ghana (40%) and Cameroon (21%).In October and November 2021, confirmed active YF outbreaks were reported in Ghana and Chad respectively and required support from the International Coordinating Group (ICG) for vaccine provision from the emergency global stockpile of YF vaccine. Among the affected countries some are classified as having a fragile, conflict-affected or vulnerable (FCV) setting, in addition to low YF population immunity. Gaps or delays in investigations of suspected YF cases due to insecurity (Chad, Cameroon, CAR) or under-served (nomadic) communities (Ghana) have implications for harm to human health and risk of onward amplification and spread.The situation is also concerning where cases have been confirmed in inaccessible health districts with weak YF surveillance, preparedness, and response systems, and significant population displacements into neighbouring countries (e.g., Cameroon, Chad, CAR). In addition, there are major urban areas such as Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire that have reported YF cases and are a high concern as they pose a significant risk of amplification mediated by Aedes aegypti person-mosquito-person transmission (without sylvatic intermediary). Urban YF outbreaks can rapidly amplify with onward spread internationally, as seen in Angola and DRC in 2016. The case count of confirmed and probable cases is rapidly evolving and has challenges to track due to the complexity of interpretation in the context of available epidemiological and clinical data, including vaccination history of the cases.The overall YF vaccination coverage in these regions is not sufficient to provide herd immunity and prevent outbreaks. Estimates from WHO and UNICEF in 2020 on routine YF vaccination coverage was 44% in the African region, much lower than the 80% threshold required to confer herd immunity against YF. The national coverage in the countries of concern were all under 80% with the exception of Ghana (88%): Congo (69%), Cote D’Ivoire (69%), Niger (67%), Cameroon (57%), DRC (56%), Nigeria (54%), CAR (41%), and Chad (35%). These low YF vaccination coverages indicate the presence of an underlying susceptible population at risk of YF and a risk of continued transmission.These outbreaks are occurring in a large geographic area in the West and Central regions of Africa. These reports signal a resurgence and intensified transmission of the YF virus. The outbreaks have included areas that have previously conducted large-scale mass vaccination campaigns but with persistent and growing gaps in immunity due to lack of sustained population immunity through routine immunization and/or secondary to population movements (newcomers without history of vaccination). For example, outbreaks were identified in late 2020 in countries with a history of nationwide preventive mass vaccination campaigns (PMVCs) including an outbreak in Guinea notified in November 2020 (history of PMVCs 2005, 2010) and Senegal notified in November 2020, (history of PMVCs 2007 plus reactive campaigns in 2011, 2005, 2002). In 2021, the recently confirmed outbreak in Ghana is marked by an impact on nomadic communities, despite the country having completed the final phase of PMVC in November 2020. Outbreaks and case reports of suspected, probable and/or confirmed cases are also occurring in other settings in the region where nationwide phased PMVCs are ongoing and yet to be completed (DRC, Nigeria), or yet to be initiated (Chad, Niger), further compounding the risk of spread.Another potential factor contributing to the enhanced risk is a delay in the investigation of probable cases. The investigation of probable cases has faced challenges in many of the reporting countries made complicated due to stretched resources, capacity, and logistical challenges. The health systems in the nine countries with confirmed YF, in addition to the COVID-19 pandemic and COVID-19 vaccine rollout, have been strained with many other competing acute public health outbreaks which has diverted attention from YF preparedness and response activities.The numerous YF cases and outbreaks in a broad geographic scope, with upward trend of confirmed cases and outbreaks, is indication of ongoing intense YF virus transmission in an extended area in the region and represent a persistent and growing risk to all unvaccinated people living or visiting YF high-risk countries. Countries reporting probable but no confirmed YF case in 2021Probable YF cases have also been reported from Benin, Burkina Faso, Gabon, Mali, Togo, and Uganda. The most recent, with samples collected during September/October, were two cases in Port-Gentil district (Ogooué-Maritime province), Gabon and two cases in Haho (Notse city) and Ogou (Atakpame city) health districts, Plateaux region, Togo. These samples are currently being shipped to the regional reference laboratories for confirmation.Yellow fever (YF) is an acute viral disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes (including Aedes sp. and Haemogogus sp). Transmission can be amplified in circumstances where the Aedes mosquitos (day feeder) are present in urban settings and densely populated areas causing a rapid spread of the disease. While many people who become infected do not experience severe symptoms, a subset will develop severe disease. Following a 3-6-day incubation period, cases develop an “acute” phase illness characterized by fever, muscle pain with a prominent backache, headache, shivers, loss of appetite, nausea and/or vomiting, which resolves within 3-4 days. Approximately 15% of cases enter a second “toxic” phase within 24 hours of initial remission, which may include high fever, jaundice with or without abdominal pain and vomiting, haemorrhage, and kidney failure, 50% of these cases die within 10 to 14 days. Vaccination is the most important means of preventing the infection.The risk at regional level is assessed as high due to;The overall risk at the global level is considered low, as no cases related to this current outbreak have been reported outside of the African region, at this stage. However, there are favourable ecosystems for YF outside the African region and there might be challenges in the surveillance and immunization capacities due to potential onward transmission, if not timely detected.More than 2 billion individuals in Asia live in areas where the competent vectors A. aegypti and A. albopictus are present. The expansion of global air travel and the rapid ecological and demographic changes increase the risk of YF introductions into Asia. Based on the interconnectivity with endemic countries, studies have suggested China, India, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia are at the greatest risk of YF introduction; however, the risk of autochthonous transmission is unknown. There is a risk of outbreaks in urban settings, introduced by viraemic travellers to largely unprotected urban populations such as Lagos (Nigeria), N’Djamena (Chad) or Bangui (CAR), with continued risk of rapid amplification internationally. The impact on public health will persist until the ongoing outbreaks are controlled, YF vaccination coverage is high and immunity gaps in the population are closed. The importation of cases to countries with suboptimal coverage and persisting population immunity gaps poses a high risk to the Region and may jeopardize the tremendous efforts invested to achieve elimination.The countries reporting YF cases and outbreaks are all high priority countries for the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemic (EYE) strategy. These countries have introduced yellow fever vaccination into their routine immunization schedule for those aged 9 months, and also requirements of proof of vaccination against YF for all incoming travellers ≥9 months, except Chad and Nigeria, who request proof of vaccination only for travellers coming from countries with a risk of yellow fever transmission. Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreaks.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers 9 months of age or older going to yellow fever high risk countries. The affected countries also require a yellow fever vaccination certificate for travellers aged 9 months or over.Yellow fever vaccines recommended by WHO are safe, highly effective and provide life-long protection against infection. In accordance with the IHR (2005), the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated with a WHO approved vaccine. A booster dose of approved yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO has published guiding principles for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and is currently developing specific operational guidance for conducting mass vaccination campaigns in the COVID-19 context. When conditions permit, the EYE Strategy will support rapid resumption of preventive YF activities according to WHO guidance.WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to seek rapidly medical advice when presenting signs. Viraemic returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.The updated areas at-risk for yellow fever transmission and the related recommendations for vaccination of international travellers were updated by WHO on 1 July 2020; the map of revised areas at risk and yellow fever vaccination recommendations is available on the WHO International Travel and Health website.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to the region on the basis of the information available on these outbreaks. Cases of Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) have been consistently reported in South Sudan since 2014, with recurrent outbreaks occurring in Bentiu, Rubkona county, Unity state (central-north part of South Sudan), where a camp for internally displaced persons (IDP) is located.In 2021, the number HEV cases have risen significantly in the country, increasing from 564 reported during the triennium 2018-2020, to 1143 suspected cases with five deaths in 2021 (as of 29 November). In last two years (2020-2021), a total of  1420 suspected cases were reported, of which 47 have been laboratory confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) at the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI).The current 2021 outbreak is occurring in Unity State, with cases mainly being reported from Bentiu IDP camp. This led the Ministry of Health (MoH) to declare a HEV outbreak in Bentiu internally displaced people  (IDP) camp in August 2021. A proportion of cases (323; 28.3%) has been reported from outside the camp, in Bentiu and Rubkona towns, suggesting ongoing transmission in the surrounding community.  Males aged 15-44 years are being reported as the most affected group, followed by male children 1-4 years, and females aged 15-44 years. There are no cases currently hospitalized, with clinical management implemented in outpatient departments (OPD).Bentiu IDP camp hosts over 107,000 people and is divided into five sectors. HEV cases are reported from all sectors, highlighting widespread transmission.Unity State, is also affected by a flood that has caused a massive displacement and the development of new IDP sites, adding 30,000 more IDPs hosted in the Bentiu IDP camp. Leadership and coordinationSurveillanceSupportive case managementWASHCommunity engagementHEV Vaccination Hepatitis E is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis E virus, transmitted by the faecal-oral route, mainly through contaminated water. It can lead to serious public health impacts particularly among special populations: those in IDP camps and pregnant women. Risk factors for HEV are linked to poor sanitation conditions, allowing viruses excreted in the stools of infected individuals to enter water intended for human consumption.Usually, the infection resolves spontaneously within 2 to 6 weeks, with a case fatality ratio (CFR) of 0.5-4%. In rare cases, acute hepatitis E can be severe and progress to fulminant hepatitis (acute liver failure). Generally, CFR for pregnant women is reported to be higher than the overall CFR for HEV infections, reaching 25%. Displaced persons and refugees experience the highest attack rates when outbreaks occur given the overcrowded nature of their living conditions and poor hygiene situation.Cases of HEV have consistently been reported from Bentiu IDP camp since 2014 but have risen and surpassed epidemic threshold levels in 2021.The overall risk at the global level remains low, while at the national level is assessed as high due to:As the affected area is close to the border with Sudan and Ethiopia, at the regional level the overall risk is considered moderate due to the presence of the mobile IDP populations and refugees that cross these borders. While there have been fewer documented refugees coming from Ethiopia into South Sudan, a significant amount of traffic occurs for people heading to Sudan, particularly from Rubkona county - where the Bentiu IDP camp is located - to Khartoum, the capital of Sudan.Additionally, there is a current outbreak of HEV at the border with South Darfur state in Sudan, that poses potential risk of cross-border spread. There is no specific treatment for HEV. Prevention is the most effective approach against this disease.To prevent the spread of acute hepatitis E, WHO recommends improving access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation. The quality of drinking water should be regularly monitored in neighbourhoods affected by this epidemic. Coverage of latrines and drinking water sources should be increased to prevent open defecation and to ensure hand hygiene. Health promotion and prevention activities, as well as ensuring early, appropriate, and equitable health care services to combat HEV epidemics, can help improve public health outcomes, especially in resource-limited settings. At the individual level, infectious risks can be reduced by maintaining hygienic practices such as washing hands with clean water and soap - especially before handling food, avoiding consumption of water and/or ice of unknown purity, and following WHO hygiene practices for food safety.Since the incubation period for HEV ranges from 2-10 weeks, cases may continue to occur up to the tenth week (maximum incubation period) even after measures to ensure safe water, sanitation and hygiene promotion have been adopted.Interventions must continue to target vulnerable populations by establishing or strengthening antenatal diagnosis for pregnant women with symptoms, strengthening national capacities for diagnosis and clinical case management, and cross-border collaboration with neighbouring countries.To date, a hepatitis E vaccine has been developed for commercialization, and licensed in China and Pakistan. While WHO does not recommend the introduction of the vaccine as part of national routine population immunization programs, WHO recommends that national authorities may decide to use the vaccine in outbreak settings, including in populations at high risks, such as pregnant women. Vaccine use should therefore be considered to mitigate or prevent an outbreak of hepatitis E, as well as to reduce the effects of an outbreak in high-risk individuals, such as pregnant women.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on South Sudan or any of the affected countries based on the currently available information. On 16 December 2021, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) declared the end of the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak that affected Beni Health Zone (HZ) in North Kivu Province, DRC. The declaration was made in accordance with WHO recommendations , 42-days after the second negative test of the last confirmed case.Between 8 October to 16 December, a total of 11 cases (eight confirmed, three probable) including nine deaths and two survivors have been reported from Beni HZ. Of the nine deaths, seven were in the community and two occurred at the Ebola Treatment Centre (ETC). The overall case fatality ratio (CFR) is 82% (9/11) among total cases while 75% (6/8) among confirmed cases.This outbreak was declared on 8 October 2021 when the index case; a 3-year-old boy developed symptoms including physical weakness, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, breathing difficulty, dark stool and blood in their vomit and later died on 6 October (for more details, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 10 October 2021).On 7 October, samples were tested using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Institute of Biomedical Research (INRB) laboratory in Beni. These were later sent to the Rodolphe Mérieux INRB Laboratory, Goma on 8 October and EVD was confirmed by RT-PCR on the same day. This event followed a cluster of three deaths (two children and their father) who were neighbours of the index case. These three patients died on 14, 19 and 29 September after developing symptoms consistent with Ebola, however, none were tested for the virus. Full genome sequencing, performed by the INRB in Kinshasa city, from the initial confirmed case indicates that this outbreak was not the result of a new zoonosis from an animal reservoir but was linked to a persistent Ebola virus infection.During the outbreak period (8 October to 16 December 2021), three (16%) of the 19 health areas in Beni HZ reported confirmed cases, namely, Butsili (six cases), Bundji (one case) and Ngilinga (one case). Children under the age of five years accounted for 50% (4/8) of all confirmed cases. To date, all contacts completed their 21-day follow-up period and were discharged from active follow-up.Additionally, from 8 October to 13 December, a total of 21 916 alerts were reported from nine health zones including 15 642 from Beni, 21 558 (98%) of which were investigated and 1709 were validated as suspected cases of EVD.  The Ministry of Health (MoH), together with WHO and other partners, initiated measures to control the outbreak and prevent its further spread. The MoH activated the national and district emergency management committees to coordinate the response. Multidisciplinary teams were deployed to the field to actively search and provide care for cases; identify, reach and follow-up contacts; and sensitize communities on the outbreak prevention and control interventions.In addition, the following public health measures were taken in response to the EVD outbreak;  The current re-emergence of EVD is the fifth outbreak in less than three years. The last EVD outbreak was reported in North Kivu Province earlier this year in February and was declared over on 3 May 2021 (for more details please see the Disease Outbreak News  published on 4 May 2021)  All probable and confirmed EVD cases were identified in three health areas of Beni HZ, within the densely populated city of Beni.  WHO continues to monitor the situation and the risk assessment will be updated as more information is available.WHO has noted that although the current resurgence is undesirable, it is not unexpected given the fact that EVD is enzootic in the DRC and the Ebola virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region; it means that the risk of re-emergence through exposure to an animal host cannot be excluded. In addition, it is not unusual for sporadic cases to occur following a major outbreak. The Ebola virus can persist in certain body fluids of EVD survivors. In a limited number of cases, secondary transmissions resulting from exposure to survivors' body fluids have occurred. Therefore, maintaining collaborative relationships with survivor associations while monitoring survivors is a priority to mitigate any potential risk.Re-emergence of EVD is a major public health issue in the DRC and there are gaps in the country’s capacity to prepare for and respond to outbreaks. A confluence of environmental and socioeconomic factors including poverty, community mistrust, weak health systems, and political instability is accelerating the rate of the emergence of EVD in the DRC.WHO considers that ongoing challenges in terms of access and security, epidemiological surveillance, coupled with the emergence of COVID-19, as well as ongoing outbreaks such as cholera and measles might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to the re-emergence. WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans:Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since the beginning of 2021, Cameroon has reported sporadic cases of cholera. During week 43 of 2021, ending on 31 October, health authorities declared a cholera outbreak that is currently active in the South-West region, with cases also reported from the Centre and Littoral regions. Between 25 October and 10 December 2021, these three regions reported a cumulative number of 309 suspected and 4 laboratory-confirmed cholera cases, with 19 deaths (case fatality ratio (CFR) of 6.1%).The South-West region, reported the first two cases on 27 October in Kesse area, Bamusso commune in Ekondo Titi health district. Two stool samples were collected from the cases and tested positive for cholera by culture at the Laquintinie Hospital laboratory in Douala. As of 10 December, a cumulative number of 163 suspected cases with 7 deaths (CFR 4.3%) have been identified in Ekondo Titi health district. Sixty-six percent of cases were male and 16.6% were under the age of five. The outbreak has spread to the neighbouring health district of Bakassi, with 95 suspected cases and 11 deaths (CFR 11.6%).On 28 October 2021, the Centre region, notified a suspected case of cholera with no epidemiological link to cases reported in the South-West region, from the health area of Akok-Ndoe, Biyem-Assi health district part of the urban community of Yaoundé, the capital of Cameroon. A stool sample tested positive for cholera by Rapid Diagnostic Test, and on 29 October was confirmed positive by PCR and culture for Vibrio cholerae at the Pasteur Centre of Cameroon, Yaounde. A cumulative number of 50 suspected cases and one death (CFR 2%) have been reported from Biyem-Assi health district. Of these 52% were male and 8% were under the age of five. The last case to date in the Centre region was reported on 11 November 2021.In the Littoral region, a cholera case was confirmed by culture on 21 November 2021 in an eight-year-old boy at the Laquintinie Hospital laboratory in Douala. This has remained an isolated case with no further suspected cases. His family and those in his neighbourhood also reported no history of travel.CoordinationSurveillanceLaboratory and Case managementWater, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)Risk Communication and Community EngagementCholera is an acute enteric infection caused by the ingestion of Vibrio cholerae bacteria present in contaminated water or food. In its severe form, it can lead to severe dehydration and death within hours if left untreated. It is primarily linked to insufficient access to safe water and adequate sanitation. It has the potential to spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the population exposed, and the context.Cholera is endemic in Cameroon. Since 2018, cholera outbreaks have been reported annually in various regions of the country including in the currently affected regions (South-West, Centre and Littoral). Several risk factors concur with the circulation of Vibrio cholera in the country, including limited access to safe drinking water and health care facilities in the affected areas of the South-West region and in the capital city of Yaoundé, as well as cultural practices that contribute to unsafe WASH conditions.The Biyem-Assi health district in the Centre region is a densely populated area with insufficient access to safe drinking water and sanitation, that is located in the heart of the capital city Yaoundè. This may allow a cholera outbreak to spread quickly if swift control measures are not implemented.The affected health districts in the South-West region (Ekondo Titi, Bakassi and Mobonge) belong to an archipelago in a humanitarian crisis zone with an ongoing armed conflict, and the risk of cholera exportation to other neighbouring districts cannot be excluded. Security constraints, limited geographic accessibility of some areas, and suboptimal communication networks lead to irregular epidemiological updates and potential underreporting of cases. The populations have no or limited access to safe drinking water and latrines, and the overall hygienic conditions are inadequate. There is limited access to health care and patients may have to travel long distances by boat to seek care.In addition, the affected South-West region borders Nigeria, and there is a frequent and substantial cross-border population movement. In the northern areas, Cameroon is bordered by Adamawa, Borno and Taraba states of Nigeria which are currently affected by a cholera outbreak. There is also a risk of further international spread especially to the Republic of Chad which borders both Nigeria and Cameroon. Therefore, the risk at the national and regional levels is assessed as high. At the global level, the risk is considered low.WHO recommends the improvement of access to safe water and sanitation, proper waste management, food safety practices and hygienic practices to prevent cholera transmission. Key public health communication messages should be provided.Reinforcement of surveillance, particularly at the community level, is advised. Appropriate case management, including improving access to care, should be implemented in the areas affected by the outbreak to decrease mortality. Ensuring national preparedness to rapidly detect and respond to the cholera outbreak will be needed to decrease the risk of spread to new areas. As the outbreak is occurring in border areas with active population movements, WHO encourages respective countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to and from Cameroon based on the information available on the current outbreak.WHO fact sheet on choleraWHO Health Topics – CholeraGlobal Task Force on Cholera ControlDengue is endemic in Pakistan, with the last notable outbreak, with 53,498 cases and 95 deaths, being reported between September to December 2019.From 1 January to 25 November 2021, a total of 48,906 cases including 183 deaths (case fatality ratio (CFR): 0.4%) have been reported from four provinces including Punjab, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Sindh, Balochistan, and the federally administered Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT), and Azad Jammu and Kashmir autonomous territories (AJK), Pakistan.As of 25 November, Punjab province reported the highest number of cases with 24,146 cases and 127 deaths (CFR: 0.5%) accounting for 49.4% and 69.4% of all cases and deaths, respectively. The deaths were mainly reported from Lahore district. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, a border province with Afghanistan, reported the second largest number of cases with 10,223 cases, accounting for 21% of all cases, and 10 deaths (CFR: 0.1%).  Sindh province reported 5,548 cases with 24 (CFR:0.4%) deaths followed by the federally administered ICT with 5,261 cases and 21 (CFR: 0.4%) deaths, Balochistan province with 2,054 cases, and AJK reported 1,674 cases with one (CFR:0.1%) death. The federal and provincial health departments are implementing public health measures, including the following:  Vector Surveillance and Control Activities: WHO country office (WCO) is supporting the government of Pakistan by undertaking the following response activities:Dengue is a viral infection transmitted by mosquitoes caused by four types of dengue virus (DENV) (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype, but not to other serotypes. Secondary infections put people at greater risk of severe dengue leading to hospital admissions.  In Pakistan, dengue fever is endemic with reports of seasonal surges of cases and circulation of the different serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) in various parts of the country. Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus are widely adapted vectors for urban and peri urban environments. As dengue is recurrent in the country, the population may be at risk of re-infection and therefore, serious complications if not treated promptly and correctly. With the current COVID-19 pandemic affecting the national health system capacity, and competing communicable disease outbreaks, there is a high risk of serious health impacts from dengue fever.  This outbreak underscores the need for improved vector surveillance, enhanced laboratory capacity for better case detection, sensitized health care providers on case management and improved surveillance of acute febrile illness in Pakistan to better define disease burden and seasonality patterns. The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection and access to appropriate healthcare reduces severe dengue and mortality. Furthermore, the prevention and control of dengue depends on effective sustained vector control measures. WHO promotes the strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including Aedes spp. (the vector of dengue) . IVM activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e., environmental management and source reduction, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals). Vector control activities may include covering, draining, and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis.Where indoor biting occurs, application of mosquito repellent lotion or sprays on skin, use of household insecticide aerosol products, mosquito coils, or other insecticide vaporizers are recommended. Household fixtures such as window and door screens and air conditioning can also reduce bites. Since Aedes mosquitoes are day biters (the primary vector for transmission) with peak activity at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures including the use of clothing to minimize skin exposure are recommended. During outdoor activities, mosquito repellents may be applied to exposed skin or to clothing. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people who sleep outside or during the day (e.g., infants, bedridden and night workers) including dengue patients in hospitals and at night to prevent mosquito bites. In addition, vector and human case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Key public health messages on reducing the risk of dengue transmission among the population are expected to continue to be provided.  Community based health workers should be sensitized on these key messages to be promoted in all affected areas.WHO does not recommend any general or trade restrictions to Pakistan based on the information available for this event.  On 17 November 2021, the National IHR Focal Point of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) notified WHO of one laboratory-confirmed case of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in UAE.  The case is a 60-year-old male from the Abu Dhabi region, UAE. He developed fever, sore throat, shortness of breath, and a runny nose on 3 November and presented to hospital on 5 November. On 6 November, he was admitted to hospital where a computerized tomography (CT) scan confirmed the diagnosis of pneumonia. On 11 November, a nasopharyngeal swab was collected and tested positive for MERS-CoV by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). SARS-CoV-2 testing was also performed, and the results were negative.  The patient has diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia as co-morbidities. He owns a dromedary camel farm in Abu Dhabi and had a history of close contact with dromedary camels at his farm in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. No travel history was reported during the same period. The patient has recovered and was discharged following two negative tests for MERS-CoV.Since July 2013, a total of 93 cases including the current case of MERS-CoV have been reported from UAE.Upon identification, an incident report, case investigation and contact tracing were initiated. The investigation is currently ongoing and includes screening of all close contacts at the patient’s household, his camel farm and healthcare facilities. Fifty-one contacts were identified and were monitored daily for the appearance of respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms for 14 days after their last exposure to the confirmed case.All samples from close contacts of the patients tested negative for MERS-CoV. One health care worker who identified as a close contact is currently outside of UAE and has been notified and advised to self-monitor. He is asymptomatic.The veterinary authorities have been notified and an investigation of animals is ongoing.Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Approximately 35% of patients with MERS-CoV have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems and until more is known about the disease, the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries who are the natural host and zoonotic source of MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans but it has, so far, mainly occurred in health care settings and to a limited extent among close contacts.The notification of this additional case does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or in a healthcare setting. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. However, with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the testing capacities for MERS-CoV have been severely affected in some countries since most of the resources are redirected to prevent and control the pandemic. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Human-to-human transmission in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures. Therefore, IPC measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities.  Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures or in settings where aerosol generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, supported quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions with UAE.On 22 November 2021, the International Health Regulations national focal point (IHR NFP) for Yemen notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in stool samples from two children with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in Yemen.The first case, a nine-year-old girl, from Thubab district, Taiz governorate, south-western Yemen, experienced onset of paralysis on 30 August. The child had not been vaccinated against polio. Two stool samples were collected on 31 August and 2 September, and VDPV2 was confirmed on 22 November, with 10 nucleotide differences from the Sabin type 2 poliovirus vaccine strain.The second case, a 26-month-old girl, from Marib district, Marib governorate, north-east of Sana’a city, experienced onset of paralysis on 1 September. The child had also not been vaccinated against polio. Two stool specimens were collected on 4 and 5 September, and VDPV2 was confirmed on 22 November with 11 nucleotide differences from the Sabin type 2 poliovirus vaccine strain.The two districts do not share a border and are approximately 430 km apart. The two VDPV isolates are genetically linked, and therefore, classified as cVDPV2. This is a new emergence and the viruses detected are not related to other known cVDPV2s globally.The confirmation of cVDPV2 comes in the context of an ongoing outbreak of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 1 (cVDPV1), which has to date paralyzed 35 children (three in 2021, 31 in 2020, and one in 2019).The last VDPV2 case in the country was reported in June 2016 in Aden governorate, southern Yemen, and was classified as ambiguous[1] VDPV2 (aVDPV2). According to the WHO/UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, polio vaccine third dose (POL3) coverage was reported to be 66% in 2020.The Ministry of Health, supported by the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) partners, conducted a field investigation, and started implementing the polio outbreak preparedness and response plan. In addition, AFP surveillance continues to be enhanced.   The risk of further spread of this strain in Yemen is exacerbated by decreased immunization rates during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the detected cases are from two governorates with accessibility and security issues, with high risk of population displacement to other governorates due to the recent security situation in Marib and Western Coast of Yemen which has led to  significant levels of population movement, including to and from the Horn of Africa. The ongoing humanitarian crisis is a major risk factor to be considered for the spread of the disease.Based on the above-mentioned gaps and challenges, WHO considers the risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 to be high.  Additionally, the existing cVDPV1 outbreak as well as the emergence of cVDPV2 highlight the gaps in routine immunization coverage and inadequate outbreak response. It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within four weeks to 12 months of travel. As per the advice of the Emergency Committee, the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and implementation of advice aimed at reducing this risk is strongly encouraged. Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict travel of individuals at the point of departure if not vaccinated or cannot prove their vaccination status.    [1] Ambiguous VDPV (aVDPV): a VDPV isolate from individuals or from environmental samples, without evidence of circulation and from individuals with no known immunodeficiency.From 15 October to 27 November 2021, 202 suspected cases of Yellow Fever (YF) including 70 confirmed cases and 35 deaths [Case Fatality Ratio (CFR): 17%] have been reported in four regions in Ghana (Savannah, Upper West, Bono and Oti regions). YF is endemic in Ghana and is associated with severe disease in approximately 15% of cases and a high CFR. YF cases were reported mostly from nomadic populations who had moved from Nigeria into a forest reserve in Ghana’s Savannah region which is visited by tourists. The region shares porous borders with Cote d’lvoire and Burkina Faso, highlighting the potential for spread outside of Ghana. The cases, age ranging from 4 months to 70 years, presented with symptoms of body pain, fever, abdominal pain, vomiting, jaundice and bleeding from the gums. Females accounted for 52% (105/202) of the cases. A YF outbreak was confirmed after three samples tested positive for YF by PCR (negative for Ebola virus disease, dengue and other viral hemorrhagic fevers) at Institute Pasteur Dakar in Senegal, the regional reference laboratory. As of 27 November, 70 out of 196 samples collected have tested positive for YF by IgM and/or polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and results are pending for 68 samples. Plaque reduction neutralization testing was positive in 5 samples at the regional reference laboratory.Although there is high overall population immunity against YF in Ghana (88% in 2020 according to WHO-UNICEF estimates), pockets of the population, including unvaccinated nomadic people, remain at risk for YF which could result in continued YF transmission. The current outbreak investigation found settlements of newcomer populations who had arrived after the last mass campaign and were largely unvaccinated.Surveillance and laboratoryVaccinationVector ControlRisk communicationThe overall risk of YF from this event at the national, regional and global levels are assessed as moderate, moderate and low, respectively. YF is an acute viral disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes (including Aedes spp. and Haemogogus spp.). A subset of people who become infected with YF experience severe symptoms. Approximately 15% of the cases enter the second toxic phase within 24 hours of the initial remission. The second toxic phase may be characterized by fever, jaundice, with or without abdominal pain, vomiting haemorrhage and kidney failure. Of these, 20-50% die within 10 to 14 days. Vaccination offers lifelong immunity and is considered to be the most important means of preventing YF, while other strategies such as vector control are complementary. There is no specific treatment for YF, and cases receive supportive care for complications such as dehydration, renal failure and fever.The national risk was assessed as moderate due to the following reasons:The regional risk was assessed as moderate due to the favorable ecosystem in the neighboring countries and porous borders. The global risk was assessed as low, however, the Mole National Park which is located in both North and West Gonja Districts is visited by tourists, therefore there could be a risk of exportation of the virus.Ghana is a high priority country for the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemic (EYE) strategy. Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of YF. In 1992, the Government of Ghana introduced YF vaccine into the routine immunization programme for children at 9 months as part of the national YF control and elimination programme. In urban centers, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreak.WHO recommends vaccination against YF for all international travellers to Ghana, aged 9 months or older. YF vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. In accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005), the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against YF extends to the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of YF vaccine cannot be required for international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of YF signs and symptoms, and instructed to promptly seek medical advice when presenting signs. Returning travellers who are viraemic may pose a risk for establishing local transmission cycles of YF where the competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Ghana in relation to this event, based on available information. On 16 November 2021, the IHR National Focal Point of the United States of America (USA) notified PAHO/WHO of an imported case of human monkeypox in Maryland, USA. The patient is an adult, resident of the USA, with recent travel history to Nigeria.The individual was in Lagos, Nigeria when they developed a rash. On 6 November, they travelled from Lagos, Nigeria to Istanbul, Turkey and, on 7 November, from Istanbul to Washington, D.C, USA. The patient has not been vaccinated against smallpox in the past and is currently in isolation in Maryland.Samples of skin lesions were positive on 13 November by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays for orthopoxvirus-generic and non-variola orthopoxvirus at the Maryland laboratory of the Laboratory Response Network (LRN). On 16 November, the USA Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) confirmed the diagnosis on the same two lesion specimens by PCR assays for monkeypox, and also, specifically for the West African clade of monkeypox, the strain that re-emerged in Nigeria since 2017.At this time, while the patient had remained in Lagos throughout the stay in Nigeria, the source of infection for this case is unknown.This is the second time that an imported human monkeypox case has been detected in a traveler to the USA. The first imported human case in a traveler from Nigeria was reported on 15 July 2021 (for more information on the first case, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 27 July 2021). In addition to these two cases, since 2018, six importations of human cases of monkeypox have been reported in non-endemic countries in travelers from Nigeria to Israel (one case), Singapore (one case) and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (four cases). The frequency of global travel indicates that further exported cases may be expected among travelers from endemic areas / countries. Additionally, there may be cases that are undetected, misdiagnosed, or not reported.The USA CDC is working with their international health counterparts, state, and local health officials to assess potential risks and to contact airline passengers and others who may have had contact with the patient on flights from Nigeria to Turkey and onwards to the USA, in transit, or after arrival in the USA. Travelers on these flights were required to wear masks due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of spread of monkeypox via respiratory droplets to others on these flights is therefore considered low.Public health measures are being taken, including isolation and continued monitoring of the patient’s clinical recovery. Possible contacts are being notified for assessment and monitoring by their local or state health department. Post-exposure vaccination with a smallpox vaccine within 14 days of the last contact with the case may be recommended for cases who are at intermediate and high risk.Healthcare providers have been advised to be vigilant to poxvirus-like lesions, particularly among travelers returning from Nigeria. Because of the public health risks associated with a single case of monkeypox, clinicians should report suspected cases immediately to state or local public health authorities regardless of whether they are also exploring other potential diagnoses. Monkeypox is a sylvatic zoonosis with incidental human infections that usually occur sporadically in forested parts of Central and West Africa. It is caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV) that belongs to the Orthopoxvirus family. Genomic sequencing shows there are two monkeypox clades – Congo Basin and West African and there have been observed differences in human pathogenicity and mortality in the two geographic areas. Both clades can be transmitted by contact and droplet exposure via exhaled large droplets or contact with fomites such as bedding; infection can be fatal in humans.The incubation period for monkeypox is usually from 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days. The disease is often self-limiting with signs and symptoms usually resolving spontaneously within two to four weeks. Signs and symptoms can be mild or severe, and lesions can be painful. Immune deficiency, young age, and pregnancy appear to be risk factors for severe disease. The case fatality ratio (CFR) for the West African clade has been reported to be around 1%. The recent outbreak in Nigeria recorded a higher CFR related to underlying conditions which may lead to immunodeficiency. A case fatality ratio of up to 11% (in individuals without prior smallpox vaccination) has been reported for the Congo basin clade.Since 2017, a monkeypox outbreak has been occurring in Nigeria with 218 cases confirmed to date. In addition to Nigeria, outbreaks have also been reported in nine other countries in central and western Africa since 1970. These include Cameroon, Central African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Liberia, Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, and Sudan. Sporadic small outbreaks continue to occur in some of these countries including Cameroon and the Central African Republic. However, the vast majority of cases continue to be reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with 2780 cases and 72 deaths (CFR 2.6%) reported between 1 January through 31 October 2021.While a new vaccine has been approved for the prevention of monkeypox, and traditional smallpox vaccine has been demonstrated to provide protection, these vaccines are not widely available. Increased susceptibility of humans to monkeypox is thought to be related to waning immunity due to cessation of smallpox immunization. Contact with live and dead animals through hunting and consumption of wild game or use of animal-derived products are presumed sources of human infection. Milder cases of monkeypox in adults could go undetected, misdiagnosed, or unreported and represent a risk of human-to-human transmission.There is likely to be little immunity to infection in those exposed as endemic disease is geographically limited to West and Central Africa and populations worldwide under the age of 40 or 50 years no longer benefit from the protection afforded by prior smallpox vaccination programmes. There is no specific treatment for monkeypox disease, and care is symptom-based optimal care. In some circumstances, treatment approved for smallpox may be offered on a compassionate or emergency use basis.Any illness during travel in an endemic area or upon return should be reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel and immunization history. Residents and travelers to endemic countries should avoid contact with sick, dead, or live animals that could harbor monkeypox virus (mammals including rodents, primates) and should refrain from eating or handling wild game or use of products derived from animals. The importance of hand hygiene using soap and water, or alcohol-based sanitizer should be emphasized.A patient with monkeypox should be isolated during the infectious period, just prior to and including the rash stage of the infection and until all lesions have crusted and fallen off. Timely contact tracing, surveillance measures and raising awareness of endemic and imported emerging diseases among health care providers are essential parts of preventing secondary cases and effective management of monkeypox outbreaks.Treatment for monkeypox is optimal care based on the patient’s symptoms and clinical condition.Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard, contact and droplet infection control precautions. Samples taken from people and animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.WHO does not recommend any restriction for travel to or trade with Nigeria, Turkey or the USA based on available information at this point in time.On 2 October 2021, WHO was notified of the isolation of poliovirus in the samples from an acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) case in Ukraine. The individual is a 17-month old female who had onset of paralysis on 3 September. Poliovirus type 2 was confirmed on 1 October by the Regional Reference Lab (RRL) in Helsinki, Finland, and further genetic sequencing at RRL confirmed vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (VDPV2) on 6 October. The same virus has also been isolated from six healthy siblings of the case. The family is from Rivne province, in the northwest of Ukraine.Genetic sequencing indicates the virus is closely linked with an environmental isolate in Tajikistan. Local authorities, along with WHO regional and country teams, are conducting further investigations to determine the source of the infection, and to ascertain any potential risk of further spread. Therefore, the current outbreak was classified as circulating VDPV2 (cVDPV2).Previously, an outbreak of circulating VDPV type 1 (cVDPV1) was reported in Ukraine in 2015, resulting in two cases. The last reported VDPV was classified as VDPV2 in Ukraine’s Odesa province in 2016. The virus isolated from the current reported case in Rivne is not related to the 2015 outbreak or 2016 isolates.The national immunization coverage with three doses of polio vaccine (POL3) in Ukraine was 83% in 2020.The Ministry of Health led multi-disciplinary emergency task force has been established to coordinate the public health response. Partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), including WHO, are providing support to authorities at national and subnational levels. This support includes outbreak investigation, intensified surveillance, and raising public awareness.Supplemental vaccination of all young children in the affected area is planned to ensure catch-up for any eligible children who may have missed routine polio vaccination and ensure that all are protected from the disease. The risk of national spread is assessed as high due to historically low immunization coverage rates in Ukraine and the existing subnational vaccination gaps. Although AFP surveillance is sensitive enough to detect paralytic cases, poliovirus transmission may continue undetected.The risk of international spread of this virus is currently assessed as low due to the relatively high immunization coverage and sanitary infrastructure in neighboring countries, particularly Belarus, Hungary, and Slovakia. However, the European Regional Commission for Certification of Polio Eradication expressed concern about the quality of polio surveillance and suboptimal vaccination coverage in Poland and Romania.  It is important that all countries, particularly those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen the surveillance of AFP cases in order to rapidly detect any new poliovirus importations and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories, and areas should also maintain systematically high routine immunization coverage rates at subnational levels to minimize the consequences of any new poliovirus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) or inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) within four weeks to 12 months of travel.Countries affected by poliovirus circulation are subject to temporary recommendations issued by the Emergency Committee of the International Health Regulations on Polioviruses, due to the declared Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). The latest report by the Committee is from August 2021. On 8 July 2021, a Zika virus (ZIKV) infection was laboratory-confirmed in a resident of Kerala state, south-west India. This represents the first Zika virus disease case ever reported from Kerala. ZIKV viral RNA was detected through RT-PCR testing at the National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune, in a blood sample collected from the patient, a 24-year-old pregnant woman in her third trimester of pregnancy resident in Trivandrum district. On 28 June 2021, she was admitted to a private hospital with arbovirus like symptoms of fever, headache and general rash. Laboratory results were negative for dengue virus (DENV) and chikungunya virus (CHIKV). The woman delivered on 7 July, she was reportedly in good health and there were no apparent birth defects in the new-born. In the 3 months before delivery, she had resided in Trivandrum district not having traveled during that period. Among her close contacts, her mother reported having fever and similar symptoms one week before ZIKV confirmation in her daughter.Retrospective testing was conducted among 19 hospital staff and patients at the same private hospital who had previously presented with fever, myalgia, arthralgia and petechial lesions in May 2021. Blood samples collected from these 19 ZIKV suspected cases were sent to NIV Pune, and on 10 July the laboratory results confirmed that 13 of the 19 samples tested positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR, indicating cryptic transmission of ZIKV in Kerala state since May 2021.During the period from 8 to 26 July 2021, 590 blood samples were collected in Kerala state through active case finding and passive surveillance. Of them, 70 (11.9%) tested positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR at NIV Pune, including four additional pregnant women. All these cases were from Trivandrum district, except two cases reported from Ernakulam and Kottayam districts, who both had recent travel history to Trivandrum district.On 31 July 2021, Maharashtra state also reported its first Zika laboratory-confirmed case from Belsar, a village of 3500 inhabitants located in Purandar Taluka administrative unit, Pune district. The case, a 50-year-old women, tested positive for both ZIKV (by RT-PCR and sero-neutralization) and CHIKV (by RT- PCR and IgM ELISA) at NIV Pune. Fifty-one additional samples from ZIKV suspected cases were collected from Belsar village, of them 40 tested negative for ZIKV and 11 are still pending for results.So far, no cases of microcephaly and/or Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) have been linked with this outbreak.The Kerala Health department, along with local self-government health departments has implemented the following response activities: ZIKV can cause large epidemics with a substantial demand on the public health system including surveillance, case management, and laboratory capacity to differentiate ZIKV disease from illness due to co-circulating mosquito-borne viruses like dengue and chikungunya. Although 60-80% of the Zika virus infected cases are asymptomatic or only have mild symptoms, ZIKV can cause microcephaly, congenital Zika syndrome (CZS) and GBS. Moreover, although ZIKV is primarily transmitted by Aedes species mosquitoes, it can also be transmitted from mother to foetus during pregnancy, through sexual contact, transfusion of blood and blood products, and organ transplantation.In India, ZIKV disease cases/infections have been detected in Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan states in 2018 (South-East Asian lineage), but no ZIKV-associated microcephaly has been reported. Although this event is not unexpected, given the wide distribution of the primary mosquito vector, Aedes aegypti, and competent vector, Aedes albopictus, in Kerala and Maharashtra states, this is unusual as it is the first time that ZIKV disease cases have been confirmed in these states.The overall risk is considered low at the regional level and global level, while at the national level (Kerala and Maharashtra States) is currently assessed as moderate, given that: Protection against mosquito bites during the day and early evening is a key measure to prevent ZIKV infection. Special attention should be given to the prevention of mosquito bites among pregnant women, women of reproductive age, and young children.Aedes mosquitoes breed in small collections of water around homes, schools, and workplaces. It is important to eliminate these mosquito breeding sites by appropriate methods, including: covering water storage containers, removing standing water in flower pots, and cleaning up trash and used tires. Community initiatives are essential to support local government and public health programmes to reduce mosquito breeding sites. Health authorities may also advise the use of larvicides and insecticides to reduce mosquito populations and disease spread. Semi-urban areas should prevent the breeding of Aedes spp., in rubber plantations and other stagnant pools of water.Basic precautions for protection from mosquito bites should be taken by people traveling to high-risk areas, especially pregnant women. These include the use of repellents, wearing light coloured, long-sleeved shirts and pants, ensuring rooms are fitted with screens to prevent mosquitoes from entering.For regions with active transmission of ZIKV, all persons with suspected ZIKV infection and their sexual partners (particularly pregnant women) should receive information about the risks of sexual transmission of ZIKV.WHO recommends that sexually active men and women be correctly counselled about ZIKV infection and offered a full range of contraceptive methods to be able to make an informed choice about whether and when to become pregnant in order to prevent congenital Zika syndrome and other possible adverse pregnancy and foetal outcomes.Women who have had unprotected sex and do not wish to become pregnant due to concerns about ZIKV infection should have ready access to emergency contraceptive services and counselling. Pregnant women should practice safer sex (including correct and consistent use of condoms) or abstain from sexual activity for the entire duration of pregnancy. Pregnant women should be encouraged to attend scheduled appointments and enhanced antenatal care and follow-up, including ultrasound imaging to detect microcephaly and other developmental anomalies associated with ZIKV infection in pregnancy, in accordance with the state/national response plan.For regions with no active transmission of ZIKV, WHO recommends practicing safer sex or abstinence for a period of six months for men and two months for women who are returning from areas of active ZIKV transmission to prevent infection of their sex partners. Sexual partners of pregnant women, living in or returning from areas where local transmission of ZIKV occurs, should practice safer sex or abstain from sexual activity throughout pregnancy. The page or file you are trying to access cannot be found. This is because the web address is incorrect or the file has been moved or deleted.Please try the following:On 8 October 2021, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) announced that a new laboratory confirmed case of Ebola virus disease (EVD) had been detected in Butsili Health Area, Beni Health Zone in North Kivu Province. Earlier this year, an EVD outbreak affected North Kivu Province which was declared over on 3 May 2021.  The case was a 3-year-old male who, in early October, developed symptoms including physical weakness, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, breathing difficulty, dark stool and blood in their vomit. He died on 6 October. On 7 October 2021, samples were tested at the National Institute of Biomedical Research (INRB) laboratory in Beni for molecular analysis. These were later sent to the Rodolphe Mérieux INRB Laboratory, Goma on 8 October and EVD was confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on the same day.This follows a cluster of three deaths (two children and their father) who were neighbours of the case. These three patients died on 14, 19 and 29 September after developing symptoms consistent with Ebola, however, none were tested for the virus. The first of these cases, a child, was taken to a local health center for fever, physical weakness and headache between 5-7 September 2021 in the Butsili Health Area. Her condition improved and she returned home. However, on 12 September, she was re-admitted to the same health center with diarrhoea and vomiting and tested positive for malaria by Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT). She died on the 14 September. The child’s father had onset of symptoms on 10 September. He consulted another health facility on 14 September and later was admitted to a hospital in Beni. He died on 19 September.On 27 September, the child's sister developed similar symptoms. She was taken to a local health centre and later referred to another health facility where she tested positive for malaria by RDT and was treated for severe malaria. She died on 29 September.  The Beni Health Zone was informed about these three deaths on 30 September. A joint investigation team, comprising members of the Beni Health Zone and WHO, was deployed to further investigate and list the contacts. Two samples were collected to test for COVID-19 but no samples were taken for EVD testing.  No safe and dignified burials were conducted.  Severe malaria, EVD, measles and meningitis were retrospectively listed as potential causes.  Butsili Health Area is close to Beni city, which was one of the epicentres of the 2018–2020 Ebola outbreak in the country with 736 probable and confirmed cases reported. It is about 50 km from Butembo city, which experienced a new Ebola outbreak earlier this year. It is not unusual for sporadic cases to occur following a major outbreak, but it is too early to say whether this case is related to the previous outbreaks. The city of Beni is a commercial hub with links to the neighbouring countries of Uganda and Rwanda. The North Kivu Provincial health authorities are leading the current response. The Ministry of Health, with support from WHO and partners, is investigating the most recent case. During the previous outbreaks in North Kivu, WHO helped build the capacity of local laboratory technicians, contact tracers, vaccination teams, and reached out to community groups to raise Ebola awareness and engaged them in response interventions, as well as in establishing an Ebola survivor care programme. Among the WHO staff supporting the response is a focal point for the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse.  In addition, WHO will ensure mandatory pre-deployment training and refresher training for any further deployments; reporting channels for alerts or complaints; prompt investigation of complaints; and monitoring.As of 9 October, a total of 148 contacts have been identified and are under follow up by the response team.According to the available information, the three suspected cases and the confirmed case were admitted in several health facilities where infection prevention and control measures (IPC) might not have been optimal, which increases the risk of spread. In addition, they were buried without following safe and dignified burials protocols. Additionally, as mentioned above, the cases are from a health zone that is located within the densely populated city of Beni. Therefore, there is a risk of EVD spread to other health zones.WHO is closely monitoring the situation and the risk assessment will be updated as more information becomes available.The current resurgence is not unexpected given that EVD is enzootic (present in animal reservoirs) in the DRC including this region. The risk of re-emergence through exposure to an animal host or body fluids of Ebola survivors cannot be excluded. In addition, it is not unusual for sporadic cases to occur following a major outbreak.Re-emergence of EVD is a major public health issue in the DRC and there are gaps in the country’s capacity to prepare for and respond to outbreaks. A confluence of environmental and socioeconomic factors including poverty, community mistrust, weak health systems, and political instability is accelerating the rate of the emergence of EVD in the DRC.Another challenge stretching the limited resources is the concurrent COVID-19 outbreak. The first confirmed COVID-19 case was registered in DRC on 14 March 2020. As of 5 October 2021, DRC had reported 57 197 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 1 087 deaths.WHO considers that ongoing challenges in terms of access and security, epidemiological surveillance, coupled with the emergence of COVID-19, as well as cholera, meningitis, and measles outbreaks may jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to the re-emergence of EVD cases.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans:Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since September 2017, yellow fever cases have been reported across several states in Nigeria. From 1 January to 31 August 2021, a total of 1,312 suspected cases were reported in 367 Local Government Areas (LGAs) across 36 States and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).A total of 45 blood samples were sent to the Institut Pasteur in Dakar (IPD) and 31 samples tested positive by Plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT). Of these 31 PRNT positive cases, twelve cases had a history of yellow fever vaccination. Two deaths were reported among the remaining 19 non-vaccinated PRNT positive cases (Case fatality ratio: 11%). These 19 PRNT positive cases were reported from: Enugu (seven cases), Anambra (three cases), Benue (three cases), Delta (two cases), Oyo (two cases) Niger (one case) and Osun (one case) State. Investigations into the PRNT-positive cases are ongoing.Nigeria has documented gaps in population immunity against yellow fever.  According to WHO-UNICEF 2020 estimates, the national immunization coverage for yellow fever was 54% in 2020 which is below the threshold of 80% necessary to protect against outbreaks. In the nine states reporting PRNT positive cases, the routine immunization coverage declined between 2018 and 2020 and was below 80% in 2020.  These states include Anambra, Benue, Delta, Enugu, Imo, Niger, Ondo, Osun and Oyo. Six states reported coverage below 50% (Anambra, Delta, Enugu, Imo, Osun, and Oyo states).Between 2019 and 2020, preventive mass vaccination campaigns were conducted in six (all LGAs) of the nine states. Coverage was reported to be high (>90%) in Delta and Ondo States but lower (<80%) in Anambra, Benue, Niger, Osun and Oyo States. Additionally, in Enugu State, nine out of 17 LGAs organized reactive mass vaccination campaigns in 2020, while in Imo State, mass vaccination activities have not been organized in recent years.In addition, yellow fever surveillance is sub-optimal. Not all suspected cases are documented, presumptive positive cases are not always investigated, and investigations of confirmed cases and confirmatory testing results are delayed. Additionally, vaccination status which is critical for interpretation of laboratory results and case confirmation may not be reported as part of the investigation. Yellow fever response activities are coordinated by Nigeria Center for Disease Control through a multi-agency Yellow Fever Technical Working Group. The current response includes the following: Nigeria is a high-risk country for yellow fever and is recognized as a high priority country to the global Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) Strategy. The re-emergence of yellow fever in September 2017 in Nigeria has been marked by outbreaks over a wide geographical area. A combination of vaccination and vector control strategies is the most important means of preventing infection. Yellow fever is endemic in Nigeria and, due to suboptimal immunization coverage in most states and nationwide, the risk of spread is high. Entomological investigations have confirmed the presence of the vectors, Aedes aegypti and Aedes africanus in several states across the country.Given the low routine immunization coverage, coupled with the poor performance of reactive mass immunization activities, indicate an ongoing risk in susceptible populations and thus, a risk of serious public health impact.To address the risk, the country has engaged in a multi-year plan to complete preventive mass vaccination campaigns targeting all eligible persons aged 9 months to 44-year-old, supported through the EYE and global partners. Since 2017, a total of 22 of 36 states including FCT have completed these campaigns. National and State public health authorities are currently responding to several concurrent outbreaks (COVID-19 pandemic, Lassa fever, and a widespread cholera epidemic), which are straining the available limited resources, especially human resources to conduct investigations and response activities. Additionally, the recent relaxation of COVID-19 measures could increase population mobility and the potential risk for spreading yellow fever to urban areas. Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes and has the potential to spread rapidly and cause serious public health impact. The disease is preventable using a single dose of yellow fever vaccine, which provides immunity for life. Although there is no specific treatment, supportive care to treat dehydration, respiratory failure and fever and antibiotic treatment for associated bacterial infections can reduce mortality and is recommended. Viraemic cases should stay under mosquito nets during the day to limit the risk of spread to others through bites of mosquitoes.Routine yellow fever vaccination was introduced to Nigeria’s Expanded Programme on Immunization in 2004. However, due to sub-optimal yellow fever vaccination coverage, population immunity in most areas around the country remains below herd immunity thresholds (≥80%). The EYE Strategy was launched in Nigeria in 2018, yet its implementation at the national and sub-national level remains low. Preventive campaigns for yellow fever are being implemented in Nigeria in six phases. The target is to accelerate and complete these vaccination campaigns nationwide by 2024.As yellow fever is endemic in Nigeria, it is a priority country for the EYE strategy. Accelerated phased vaccination campaigns are planned to cover the entire country by 2024. Vaccination is the primary intervention for prevention and control of yellow fever. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreak.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers from 9 months of age going to Nigeria. Nigeria requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate for all travellers aged 9 months or over as a condition of entry.Yellow fever vaccines recommended by WHO are safe, highly effective and provide life-long protection against infection. In accordance with the IHR (2005), the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated with a WHO approved vaccine. A booster dose of approved yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO encourage its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to seek rapid medical advice when presenting signs. Viraemic returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.The areas at-risk for yellow fever transmission and the related recommendations for vaccination of international travellers were updated by WHO on 1 July 2020 and are available on the WHO International Travel and Health website.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to Nigeria based on the information available on this outbreak.On 29 August 2021, the Public Health, Epidemiological Surveillance and Response Department of the Ministry of Health, Madagascar received an alert from Arivonimamo health district, Itasy region, regarding a suspected community death and 15 suspected cases of pneumonic plague that occurred in the municipality of Miandrandra. All the cases presented with fever, headache, weakness, shortness of breath, chest pain and cough. Plague is endemic in Madagascar and outbreaks occur regularly, although every outbreak is cause for concern. Furthermore, pneumonic plague is a notifiable disease under the International Health Regulations 2005.By the following day, 30 August, 25 suspected cases of pneumonic plague had been notified to the health authorities from Arivonimamo district, Itasy region, including six deaths (three community deaths and three at Miandrandra health facility), 19 of which were admitted at Miandrandra health facility for treatment. A total of 20 samples (8 sputum and 12 blood) were collected the same day for laboratory confirmation at the Pasteur Institute of Madagascar. As of 15 September 2021, a total of 20 suspected and 22 confirmed cases of plague have been notified. The median age of cases is 36 years (range 3 to 74 years), 22 cases are males and 20 are females. Reported cases are geographically located in two non-bordering regions: Itasy (3 affected municipalities in Arivonimamo district) and Haute Matsiatra (1 affected municipality in Ambalavao district). Both regions are known plague endemic areas, and during the 2017 outbreak they were highly affected with Ambalavao being the main epicenter.Among confirmed cases, 19 have clinically presented as pneumonic plague and three as bubonic plague. Eight deaths occurred among confirmed cases (2 among bubonic plague cases and 6 among pneumonic plague cases) leading to a case fatality ratio of 37% (8/22). Of them, 4 were males and 4 females, 3 occurred in the community level and 5 at health facilities.Overall, 1,064 close contacts of cases have been identified, followed up, and received chemoprophylaxis with cotrimoxazole or doxycycline. Active case finding in the communities was undertaken in all the health districts reporting cases. Health authorities, in collaboration with the Pasteur Institute of Madagascar, carried out animal surveillance in Arivonimamo district during the initial investigation on 30 August. Preliminary results showed a carriage of Yersinia pestis, the causative bacterium, in 1.3% of the rats, exceeding the alert threshold of 1%, while the pulicidal index (the ratio between the total number of fleas collected from rats captured over the total number of rats captured) was 1.7, which did not exceed the alert threshold of more than 5. Analyses were also performed in Faratsiho (Vakinakaratra region) and Besarety (Analamanga region), which are part of the endemic regions, resulting in a pulicidal indexes at 3.1 and 3.2, respectively.Interventions against pneumonic plague outbreaks are carried out by the local teams at the community level under the supervision of the district and regional teams. These teams are supported by the central level of the Ministry of Health, the Pasteur Institute of Madagascar and a number of partners including WHO. The following are actions taken and activities carried out for the management and control of this outbreak:Diagnosis and case management:Coordination:Epidemiology and surveillance:Preventative measures:Community engagement: Plague is endemic in Madagascar and cases are reported each year in bubonic and pneumonic forms. The favorable season for transmission of the disease generally lasts from September to April. Cases are usually reported from the central highlands of the country, located at an altitude of over 700 meters, as is the situation with the current outbreak involving the regions of Itasy and Haute Matsiatra. Between 200 and 400 cases of plague are usually notified each year by the Ministry of Public Health, mainly in the bubonic form.The country experienced an epidemic of pneumonic plague in 2017, which was unusual because of its magnitude and its urban character affecting major cities of the country.This form of plague is very severe and almost always fatal if it is not treated promptly. It develops either by inhaling respiratory droplets from an infected person or as a result of untreated bubonic plague after the bacteria have spread to the lungs.Madagascar has a long history of responding to plague outbreaks. It has already adopted several prevention and response plans, such as the National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Plague. Unfortunately, the weak financial capacity of the country prevents the establishment of an adequate preparedness and response strategy. The existence of other epidemics like COVID-19 and the ongoing humanitarian nutrition and food crisis in the south of the country are straining the health system and reducing the country's capacity to cope with other crises. The affected areas are geographically close to the capital of the country and the movement of the population increases the risk of spreading the disease to urban areas and other areas of the country.Thus, the risk at the national level is considered high, while at the regional and global levels this risk is low since there is no known history of exporting plague cases to other countries. Additionally, as Madagascar is an island country, the implementation of response measures is particularly effective at preventing the export of cases.WHO recommends the following actions for the management of plague outbreaks:Find and eliminate the source of infection: Identify the most likely source in the area where the human cases have been reported, typically looking for clustered areas where small animals have died in large numbers. Put in place appropriate procedures to prevent and fight infection. Control vectors and rodents. Rodent control should only be undertaken after effective disinfection measures have been implemented.Protect health workers: inform them and train them in infection prevention and control. Those in direct contact with patients with pneumonic plague should apply enhanced protective measures (personal protective equipment) and take antibiotic chemoprophylaxis for at least seven days or as long as exposure to infected patients lasts.Ensure rapid and appropriate treatment: check that adequate antibiotic therapy is administered to patients and that there are sufficient stocks of antibiotics locally.Isolate patients with pneumonic plague: patients with pneumonic plague should wear a mask as long as their clinical condition allows.Monitor and protect: identify and monitor close contacts of pneumonic plague patients and administer chemoprophylaxis for 7 days. Depending on the circumstances of the contamination, members of a household where patients with bubonic plague live should also receive chemoprophylaxis as they are also likely to have been bitten by infected fleas.Collect the necessary samples according to the clinical form (blood, pus, sputum) using appropriate procedures to prevent and control infection, and send them as soon as possible to the laboratory for analysis. This procedure should not delay the start of antibiotic therapy.Perform dignified and safe burials: a person who has died of plague, regardless of the form of the disease, presents a risk of contagion. The body should only be handled by personnel trained in this task. On 4 September 2021, the Kerala State Health department reported an isolated case of Nipah virus disease in Kozhikode district, Kerala state, India. Nipah has a relatively high case fatality ratio, and is an emerging zoonotic disease of public health importance in the South East Asia and Western Pacific WHO Regions. This is the fifth outbreak of the disease in India.On 29 August, a 12 year-old boy developed low grade fever, and the family sought care at a local health care facility. On 31 August, he was transferred to several hospitals as his condition deteriorated. On 1 September, the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate, and the family requested his transfer to another hospital in Kozhikode.On 3 September, plasma, serum and cerebrospinal fluid samples were sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune, India. On 4 September, the  presence of Nipah virus in the plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and serum samples was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and IgM antibodies was confirmed in the plasma sample by ELISA serology test. On 5 September, the patient died and a safe burial and cremation were performed the same day in Kozhikode.As of 6 September, epidemiological investigations identified contacts, including health care workers and close family members, who were placed under quarantine. The following public health responses were implemented:Nipah virus disease is an emerging zoonotic disease of public health importance in the WHO South East Asia and Western Pacific Regions, where Pteropus fruit bats, the natural host of the virus, are widespread. It was first identified during an outbreak in Malaysia in 1998, and all subsequent outbreaks have occurred in parts of Asia (India, Bangladesh, Malaysia and Singapore). Transmission can occur from direct contact with infected animals, consuming contaminated food products or through close contact with an infected person. Previous outbreaks had a seasonal pattern with occurrence during winter and spring, associated with several factors such as the breeding season of the bats, increased virus shedding by bats and fruit harvesting season. The case fatality ratio ranges from 40 to 100%.In India, the first Nipah virus disease outbreak was reported in Siliguri town in 2001, followed by a second outbreak in Nadia district in 2007, both in West Bengal state. In 2018, an outbreak was reported in Kozhikode district, and in 2019, another outbreak in Kochi district, both in Kerala state. Bats from the Pteropus spp. were the probable source of the 2018 outbreak in Kerala state.The current isolated case was reported in a rural area in Kerala state where an outbreak was previously reported in 2018. India has experienced and contained Nipah virus disease outbreaks in the past and has demonstrated the capacity to carry out outbreak control activities, including case identification, laboratory testing, case management, contact tracing and risk communication. This event is an isolated case and the risk is low at national level and low at the regional level. While there are no licensed vaccines or treatments available, experimental monoclonal antibodies have been developed to treat Nipah virus disease under compassionate use. Case management should focus on the delivery of supportive care measures to patients. Intensive supportive care is recommended for patients with severe respiratory and neurologic complications.There is evidence of Nipah virus disease among several species of domestic animals including dogs, cats, goats, sheep and horses. Nipah virus disease can be prevented by avoiding exposure to bats and sick animals in endemic areas, and avoiding consumption of fruits partially eaten by bats, and avoiding drinking raw date palm sap/toddy/juice. The risk of infection and international transmission via fruit or fruit products, such as raw date palm sap/toddy/juice contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit bats can be prevented by washing them thoroughly and peeling them before consumption.In health care settings, staff should consistently implement standard infection prevention and control measures when caring for patients to prevent nosocomial infections. Health care workers caring for a patient suspected to have Nipah virus disease should immediately contact local and national experts for guidance and to arrange for laboratory testing.Safe and dignified burial is required for all confirmed and suspected cases of Nipah virus disease.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on India based on the current information related to this event.  In early July 2021, an alert of a suspected outbreak was raised to the Health Division of Tshopo Province in the north-eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The initial alert followed an increase in deaths among people presenting with symptoms including fever, headache, and stiff neck, and some with bloody diarrhea. Samples of blood and stool were collected and tested for Ebola virus disease, shigellosis and salmonellosis. These tested negative on 19 August by the National Institute for Biomedical Research (INRB) lab in Kinshasa. Meningitis was suspected and as of 16 September, a  total of 37 samples of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were sent from the University Clinics Laboratory of Kisangani to INRB lab in Kinshasa. Of these, seven were sent to the Pasteur Institute in Paris on 1 September from Kinshasa, and were confirmed to be Neisseria meningitidis by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on 6 September. Additional testing (serotyping) was conducted on these samples from 6 to 13 September, which were identified as Serogroup W by Pasteur Institute Lab in Paris . The remaining 30 samples are planned to be sent to Pasteur Institute, Paris.  Antibiotic susceptibility testing showed that this strain of meningococcus was susceptible to Ceftriaxone. Preliminary retrospective investigations suggested that the outbreak started in early June in two mining areas in Banalia Health Zone in the north of Kisangani, the capital of Tshopo Province. This outbreak is currently active and cases continue to be reported.  The national health authorities, in coordination with WHO, are providing support in responding to this event.  The response measures include the following:  Since 2015, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported a high number of suspected cases of meningitis. Parts of the country lie within the African meningitis belt [1], where bacterial meningitis is endemic and also experiences epidemics, with 6000 to 10,000 suspected cases reported annually. However, only a very small proportion (0-2%) of cases are laboratory confirmed each year.From 1 January to 1 August 2021, the DRC reported a cumulative total of 3,842 suspected cases including 189 deaths, representing a case-fatality ratio of 5%.In Tshopo Province, which is in the African meningitis belt, the last meningitis epidemic was reported in November 2009, with 214 cases and 18 deaths (case-fatality ratio of 8%). In May 2016, the province organised a preventive vaccination campaign against meningitis A during which almost 1.7 million people aged between 1 and 29 years were vaccinated. Since then, passive surveillance has been implemented in the province as part of integrated disease surveillance.Meningococcal meningitis is associated with a high case-fatality ratio (up to 50% when left untreated) and a high incidence (over 10%) of severe sequelae. The current event has already affected 608 people , with 161 deaths. The number of cases and deaths is expected to increase given the infectiousness and lethality of bacterial meningitis. Logistical challenges, in addition to accessing and communicating with many areas within the health zone, further prevents implementation of an adequate response. Additionally, the country is responding to the COVID-19 pandemic which is impacting the health systems and disease surveillance capacities; and the existence of other ongoing epidemics in the country is limiting resources for the response to the meningitis outbreak.At the national level, there is a high risk of the disease spreading to other health zones and to the city of Kisangani, the capital of Tschopo province, due to the movement of people between the affected area and other parts of the country.At the regional level, the risk is assessed to be moderate due to the cross-border movements between the populations of the Central African Republic and the Tshopo province, and more than 100 mining sites in Banalia where people from neighbouring provinces and the Central African Republic travel for work. Although cross-border measures against COVID-19 may limit the travel and also enhance detection of symptomatic cases.The risk at global level is assessed to be low.  It is necessary to strengthen the country’s capacity and provide necessary means for diagnosis in order to respond to the current epidemic in an effective manner. Adequate logistics, proper training of health care workers on case identification and notification, and conducting risk communications in the affected health areas to heighten community awareness on measures to prevent transmission of meningitis, what symptoms should be monitored, and when to seek care, as well as strengthening community surveillance and lab capacity are critical in order to organize the response.Additionally, the country should prepare and conduct a rapid meningitis W vaccination campaign for at-risk populations.  Authorities should strengthen clinical management with ceftriaxone, provide psychosocial care for patients and families, and monitor patients affected by sequelae during and after the disease.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel or trade with the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the information available on the current outbreak.[1] A region in sub-Saharan Africa where the rate of incidence of meningitis is very high. It extends from Senegal to EthiopiaOn 16 September 2021, the Ministry of Health of Guinea declared the end of the Marburg virus disease outbreak in Guéckédou prefecture, Nzérékoré Region. In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days after the safe and dignified burial of the only confirmed patient reported in this outbreak. This was the first-ever Marburg virus disease case reported in Guinea.From 3 August 2021 to the end of outbreak declaration, only one confirmed case was reported.  The patient, a man, had onset of symptoms on 25 July. On 1 August he went to a small health facility near his village, with symptoms of fever, headache, fatigue, abdominal pain and gingival hemorrhage. A rapid diagnostic test for malaria returned a negative result, and the patient received ambulatory supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment. Upon returning home, his condition worsened, and he died on 2 August. An alert was subsequently raised by the sub-prefecture public health care facility to the prefectorial department of health in Guéckédou. The investigation team was immediately deployed to the village to conduct an in-depth investigation and collected a post-mortem oral swab sample, which was shipped on the same day to the viral hemorrhagic fever laboratory in Guéckédou city. On 3 August, the sample tested positive for Marburg virus disease by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and negative for Ebola virus disease. The deceased patient was buried safely and with dignity on 4 August, with the support of the national Red Cross.On 5 August, the National Reference Laboratory in Conakry provided confirmation by real-time PCR of the positive Marburg result, and on 9 August, the Institut Pasteur Dakar in Senegal provided an additional confirmation that the result was positive for Marburg virus disease and negative for Ebola virus disease. The Ministry of Health activated the national and district emergency management committees to coordinate the response and engage with the community. Additionally, the Ministry of Health together with WHO, the United States Centers for Disease Control, the Alliance for International Medical Action, the Red Cross, UNICEF, the International Organization for Migration, and other partners, initiated measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread including the implementation of contact tracing and active case search in health facilities and at the community level.During the outbreak, a total of one confirmed case who died, (CFR=100%) and 173 contacts were identified, including 14 high risk contacts based on exposure. Among them, 172 were followed for a period of 21 days, of which none developed symptoms. One high-risk contact was lost to follow up. At the different points of entry in Guéckédou prefecture where passengers were screened, no alerts were generated.Ongoing activities include: Marburg virus disease (MVD) is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality ratios (CFR 24-90%). In the early course of the disease, clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses, because of the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral hemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, particularly Ebola virus disease (EVD), as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infection and plague. MVD is transmitted by direct contact with the blood, bodily fluids and/or tissues of infected persons or wild animals (e.g., monkeys and fruit bats).Investigations are ongoing to identify the source of the infection. Guinea has previous experience in managing viral hemorrhagic diseases such as EVD and Lassa fever, but this was the first time that MVD was reported. The country has a fragile health care system due to the overburden of disease outbreaks, COVID-19 pandemic, and the recurrent threat of epidemics such as malaria, yellow fever, measles, Lassa fever, EVD, health care-associated infections, high rates of acute malnutrition, cyclical natural disasters such as floods, and socio-political unrest.Guinea health authorities responded rapidly to the event, and measures were rapidly implemented to control the outbreak. Cross-border population movement and community mixing between Guinea and neighboring Sierra Leone and Liberia increased the risk of cross-border spread. Sierra Leone and Liberia health authorities activated contingency plans and started public health measures at the points of entry with Guinea.The affected village is in a remote forest area located at the border with Sierra Leone, about 9 km from a main international border crossing point between the two countries. The proximity of the affected area to an international border, cross-border movement between the affected district and Sierra Leone, and the potential transmission of the virus between bat colonies and humans posed an increased risk for cross-border spread.These factors suggested a high risk at the national and regional level, and given that Guéckédou prefecture is well connected to Foya in Liberia, and Kailahun in Sierra Leone, this outbreak required an immediate and coordinated response with support from international partners. The risk associated with the event at the global level was assessed as low.Human-to-human transmission of Marburg virus is primarily associated with direct contact with blood and/or bodily fluids of infected persons, and Marburg virus transmission associated with the provision of health care has been reported when appropriate infection control measures have not been implemented.Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Marburg virus disease should apply standard and transmission-based IPC precautions to avoid any exposure to blood and/or bodily fluids, as well as unprotected contact with the possibly contaminated environment. IPC precautions include:IPC assessments of health facilities in affected areas using the IPC Scorecard revealed sub-optimal results highlighting the need for ongoing supportive supervision and mentorship for implementation of IPC in health care settings in addition to implementing IPC minimum requirements to support and strengthen future preparedness for emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases.Integrated disease surveillance and response activities, including community-based surveillance must continue to be strengthened within all affected health zones.Raising awareness of the risk factors for Marburg virus disease and the protective measures individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are the key measures to reduce human infections and deaths. Key public health communication messages include:To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmissions, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys, and apes: Between 12 March and 31 July 2021 , the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported four additional cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, including one associated death. The cases were reported from three regions including Riyadh (two cases), Hafar Albatin (one case), and Taif (one case). One  death was also reported from a previously reported case  (Case #7, please see Disease outbreak news published on 14 April ) who died on 20 March. Since 2012, Saudi Arabia has reported 2178 confirmed MERS-CoV cases with 810 deaths. The link below provides details of the four reported casesBetween September 2012 until 31 July 2021, a total of 2578 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV and 888 associated deaths were reported globally to WHO under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005). The majority of these cases have occurred in the Arabian Peninsula, with one large outbreak outside this region in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, when 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in Republic of Korea and 1 in China) and 38 deaths were reported. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected Member States.   Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Approximately 35% of patients with MERS have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems and until more is known about the disease, the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases.Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in health care settings. Outside of the healthcare setting there has been limited human-to human transmission.The notification of those additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries, or animal products (for example, consumption of  raw camel’s milk), or in a healthcare setting.WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. However, with the current COVID-19 pandemic, the testing capacities for MERS-CoV have been severely affected in many countries since most of the resources are redirected to prevent and control the current COVID-19 pandemic. The Ministry of Health of Saudi Arabia is working to increase the testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV infections. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Human-to-human transmission in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures, therefore, IPC measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities. Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures or in settings where aerosol generating procedures are conducted.Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, supported quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical condition such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. On 21 July 2021, the National IHR focal point of India notified WHO of one human case of avian Influenza A(H5N1) from Haryana state, northern India. This is the first reported case of human infection of influenza A(H5N1) virus in India.The patient was a boy under 18 years of age with a recently diagnosed underlying illness in June 2021. Shortly after immunosuppressive treatment was initiated at the hospital, he presented with fever, cough, upper respiratory symptoms and breathing difficulty on 12 June. His condition progressed to acute respiratory distress syndrome and he was mechanically ventilated but died on 12 July. In the past year, the boy resided with a family member who owned a butchery in Haryana state. Based on initial investigations, there were no reports of poultry sickness or deaths from a nearby poultry farm in the village where he resided. The source of infection is unknown at this time and none of his family members have shown similar symptoms thus far.On 7 and 11 July 2021, respiratory samples from the patient tested positive by reverse transcriptase -polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the All India Institute of Medical Science hospital for influenza A and influenza B viruses but negative for SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses. On 13 July, the samples were sent to National Institute of Virology, a WHO reference laboratory for influenza, for subtyping. Samples were tested for seasonal viruses of influenza A and influenza B, as well as avian influenza subtypes H5, H7, H9 and H10 by RT-PCR. On 15 July, the samples tested positive for influenza A(H5N1) and influenza B/Victoria lineage viruses. Whole genome sequencing and virus isolation is ongoing. Local and national health authorities have taken the following monitoring, prevention and control measures:Available information and initial field investigations suggest that no additional cases have been suspected, indicating a low likelihood of human-to-human transmission. Further sporadic cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5) viruses may be reported because these viruses have been occasionally detected in poultry populations in India. The risk assessment will be reviewed as necessary, should further epidemiological or virological information become available.India has reported outbreaks of avian influenza A(H5N1) in poultry farms every year since it was first reported in a poultry farm in Maharashtra State in February 2006. In January and February 2021, Haryana state reported an outbreak of avian influenza A(H5N8) in Panchkula district, which severely affected poultry in the area. In that outbreak, samples collected from birds from four poultry farms tested positive for avian influenza A(H5N8).Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans. The detection of this case does not change current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza. The primary risk factor for human infection with avian influenza is direct or indirect exposure to infected poultry (live or dead) or wildlife, as well as contaminated environments such as live bird markets. Additional risk factors include slaughtering, defeathering, handling carcasses of infected poultry, and preparing poultry for consumption, especially in household settings.As at all times, the public should avoid contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms and live poultry, or surfaces that might be contaminated by poultry or bird faeces. Hand hygiene with frequent handwashing with soap and water or use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer is recommended.Good food safety practices such as keeping cooking environments clean, separating raw and cooked food, and cooking food thoroughly, should also be followed. There is no evidence to suggest that influenza A(H5), A(H7N9) or other avian influenza viruses can be transmitted to humans through properly cooked poultry. There is no epidemiological evidence to suggest that people have been infected with avian influenza by consumption of eggs or egg products. However, eggs from areas with outbreaks in poultry should not be consumed raw or partially cooked (with runny yolk).Health care workers preforming aerosol-generating procedures should use airborne precautions. Standard contact and droplet precautions and appropriate personal protective equipment should be made available and used during epidemics.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human or animal health, as well as timely sharing of viruses to inform risk assessments.In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including avian influenza or variant viruses, a thorough epidemiologic investigation should be conducted (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) on the history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal human-to-human transmission of the novel virus. Additionally, clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations [IHR (2005)] and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travellers, and advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions in relation to this event based on the currently available information. On 6 August 2021, the Ministry of Health of Guinea informed WHO of a confirmed case of Marburg virus disease (MVD) in Guéckédou Prefecture, Nzérékoré Region, south-western Guinea.  The village where the case resided is near both Sierra Leone and Liberian borders. This is the first known case of Marburg virus disease in Guinea and in West Africa.The case, a male, had onset of symptoms on 25 July. On 1 August he attended a small health facility near his village of residence with symptoms of fever, headache, fatigue, abdominal pain, and gingival hemorrhage. A rapid diagnostic test for malaria was performed which was negative. The patient received supportive care with rehydration, parenteral antibiotics and treatment to manage symptoms.On 2 August 2021, he died in the community and an alert was raised by the sub-prefecture public health care facility to the prefectorial department of health in Guéckédou. Following the alert, an investigation team comprosed of national authorities and WHO experts was deployed to conduct an in-depth investigation. The team collected a post-mortem oral swab sample, which was sent the same day to the viral haemorrhagic fever reference laboratory in Guéckédou.On 3 August a real-time PCR was conducted which confirmed the sample was positive for Marburg virus disease and negative for Ebola virus disease. On 5 August the National Reference Laboratory in Conakry provided confirmation by real-time PCR of the positive Marburg result and on 9 August Institut Pasteur Dakar in Senegal provided reconfirmation that the result was positive for Marburg virus disease and negative for Ebola virus disease.The Ministry of Health (MoH) together with WHO, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ALIMA, Red Cross, UNICEF, The International Organization for Migration and other partners, have initiated measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread. Contact tracing is ongoing, along with active case searching in health facilities and at the community level. Three family members and a healthcare worker were identified as high-risk close contacts and their health is being monitored.The most recent Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in Guinea was declared over on 19 June 2021 and a network of community health workers was set up as part of this recent outbreak along with a WHO technical team which has remained in country to support the government’s implementation of a post-EVD plan to enhance disease surveillance. This team has now been repurposed to support the government’s response activities to this outbreak of Marburg.The MoH has activated the national and district emergency management committees to coordinate the response including: Marburg virus disease (MVD) is a highly virulent, epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality rates (CFR 24-90%). In the early course of the disease, clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from other tropical febrile illnesses, because of the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Differential diagnoses to be excluded include, Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infection, and plague. MVD is transmitted by direct contact with the blood, bodily fluids and/or tissues of infected persons or wild animals (e.g. monkeys and fruit bats).Currently, there is no specific therapeutic or drug approved for MVD. Nevertheless, supportive care including: close monitoring of vital signs, fluid resuscitation, electrolyte and acid base monitoring along with management of co-infections and organ dysfunction, are critical components of care and optimize patient outcomes and survival. Some monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) are under development and other antivirals are being explored for MVD (e.g. Galidesvir, Favipiravir, Remdesivir) as part of clinical trials, but without clear results in the current moment more evidence and further studies are required. However, these should only be used as part of a randomized controlled trial.As of 7 August, only one case has been confirmed and all four identified high-risk close contacts are asymptomatic. Investigations are ongoing to identify the source of the infection and additional contacts of the index case.Guinea has previous experience in managing recurring viral hemorrhagic diseases such as EVD and Lassa fever, but this is the first time that MVD has been reported. The country has a fragile healthcare system which is further exacerbated by multiple disease outbreaks, recurrent epidemics and the COVID-19 pandemic. The response activities to recent outbreaks such as EVD, COVID-19 and Lassa fever likely contributed to early detection and response to Marburg Virus Disease in Guinea.Guinea’s health authorities have responded rapidly to this event, and measures are being quickly implemented to control the outbreak. The affected village is in a remote forested area located near the border with Sierra Leone and Liberia. Cross-border population movement and community mixing between Guinea and neighboring Sierra Leone and Liberia may increase the risk of cross-border spread and as such, the Ministry of Health and Sanitation has proactively assessed the situation together with stakeholders and the district health leadership in Kono and Kailahun districts of Sierra Leone have been alerted. Health authorities in Sierra Leone and Liberia have activated contingency plans and have started public health measures at the points of entry with Guinea. Additionally the potential transmission of the virus between bat colonies and humans also pose an increased risk for cross-border spread.These factors suggest a high risk at the national level, requiring an immediate and coordinated response with support from international partners. The risk at the regional level is high, based on the fact that the Guéckédou prefecture is well connected to Liberia and Sierra Leone, although authorities are already taking action. The risk associated with the event at the global level is low. Human-to-human transmission of Marburg virus is primarily associated with direct contact with blood and/or bodily fluids of infected persons. Transmission associated with the provision of healthcare has been reported when appropriate infection control measures are not in place.Health workers should always implement standard precautions when caring for any patient, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette, use of risk based personal protective equipment (PPE), safe injection practices, environmental cleaning and disinfection, appropriate linen and waste management, and decontamination of reusable medical equipment.Other key IPC measures to prevent healthcare associated infections include early recognition (screening, triage) along with isolation and monitoring of suspected cases, investigation of health workers exposed to Marburg cases, in-patient surveillance for Marburg cases, and safe and dignified burial practices in community settings.Health workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Marburg virus should apply additional precautionary infection control measures to prevent contact with the patient’s body fluids and/or contaminated surfaces. This includes the following PPE items: face protection (a face shield or a medical mask and goggles), a clean, non-sterile long-sleeved gown, and gloves. This further emphasizes the importance of readily available PPE at health care facilities, appropriate donning/doffing areas, IPC/WASH supplies and training on their proper uses.Laboratory workers are also at risk. Samples taken from humans and animals for investigation of Marburg infection should be handled by trained staff and processed in suitably equipped laboratories.Surveillance activities, including contact tracing and active case searching, must be strengthened within all affected health zones. Thus, it is recommended that neighboring countries heighten their surveillance for Viral Hemorrhagic Fever (VHF) in border communities and health facilities as well as strengthening community engagement on alert reporting and preventive measures.Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) is key to successfully controlling outbreaks. Raising awareness of the risk factors for Marburg infection and the protective measures individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are important to reducing infections and deaths. Key public health communication messages to be provided to the affected communities include the following:To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys, and apes, the following advice should be communicated:Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to and from Guinea. On 17 July 2021, the IHR National Focal Point of the United States of America (USA) notified PAHO/WHO of an imported case of human monkeypox in Dallas, Texas, USA. The case-patient travelled from the USA to Lagos State, Nigeria on 25 June and also stayed in Ibadan, Oyo State, from 29 June to 3 July. He developed self-reported fever, vomiting and mild cough on 30 June, and a painful genital rash on 7 July. The case-patient returned to the USA, departing Lagos on 8 July and arriving on 9 July. He developed a facial rash on the next day. On 13 July, the patient attended a local hospital; fever was documented, and he was immediately placed under isolation.Sample of a skin lesion was taken, and on 14 July, an Orthopoxvirus was confirmed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) by Dallas County. On 15 July, the patient’s skin samples tested positive for the West African clade of monkeypoxvirus via RT-PCR conducted at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) Poxvirus and Rabies Branch Laboratory. The patient is currently hospitalized.At this time, the source of infection for this case is unknown. Although monkeypox is considered a zoonotic disease, the wildlife reservoir has not been determined. During an outbreak of monkeypox in human in 2003 in the USA, exposure was traced to contact with pet prairie dogs that had been co-housed with monkeypoxvirus-infected African rodents, imported from Ghana. Contact with wild animals (including live animals, meat for consumption, and other products) are known potential risk factors in enzootic countries. Prolonged contact with an infected person can also result in person-to-person transmission.An outbreak occurred in Nigeria from 2017 to 2019, with cases still being reported in 2021. In addition to Nigeria, outbreaks have also been reported in nine other countries in central and western Africa since 1970. In 2020, over 6200 suspected cases were reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sporadic outbreaks among humans have occurred in other countries such as Cameroon or the Central African Republic.This is the first time that human monkeypox has been detected in a traveller to the USA, and the first case reported in the USA since the outbreak in 2003. Human monkeypox in travellers from Nigeria has been documented on seven previous occasions since 1978. The earliest documented travel-related case occurred in Benin in a patient who had contracted the infection in Oyo State, Nigeria. Since 2018, six cases have been reported and confirmed in non-endemic countries via travelers to Israel (2018), Singapore (2019), and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (two cases in 2018, one in 2019 and one in 2021). Lagos State and Oyo State in Nigeria continue to report and confirm sporadic cases. Additionally, cases have been reported in South Sudan which were likely imported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Public health measures are being taken, including isolation and treatment of the patient. The US CDC and state and local health departments are monitoring possible community and health care contacts who, during the infectious periods, had contact with the case-patient. The US CDC is working with the airline and state and local health officials to contact airline passengers who shared a common seating area with the patient during his travel from Nigeria and within the USA.Travellers on these flights were required to wear masks due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. While the risk of spread of monkeypox via respiratory droplets to others on the flights is therefore considered low, contamination of common use areas such as toilets may have occurred. Health personnel involved in the patient’s care have been wearing appropriate personal protective equipment. Post-exposure vaccination with a smallpox vaccine within 14 days from the most recent contact with the case-patient may be recommended for some contacts. As of 25 July, over 200 persons are being monitored in the USA and none have developed symptoms consistent with monkeypox.The surveillance and public health response in Nigeria for the re-emergence of monkeypox since 2017 is ongoing across the country. Outbreak investigation related to this case is focused on Lagos and Oyo States and involves human and animal health specialists to identify possible sources of exposure and monitor persons who may have been in contact with the reported case.Monkeypox is a sylvatic zoonosis with incidental human infections that usually occur sporadically in forested parts of Central and West Africa. It is caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV) that belongs to the Orthopoxvirus family. Genomic sequencing shows there are two monkeypox clades – Congo Basin and West African – consistent with observed differences in human pathogenicity and fatality in the two geographic areas. Both clades can be transmitted by contact and droplet exposure via exhaled large droplets, or via fomites such as bedding, and can be fatal in humans.The incubation period for monkeypox is usually from 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days.  The disease is often self-limiting with symptoms usually resolving spontaneously within 14-21 days. Symptoms can be mild or severe, and lesions can be painful and become itchy. Although the West African clade of monkeypox virus infection generally causes mild disease, it may lead to severe illness in some individuals. The case fatality rate for the West African clade is around 1% while it may be as high as 10% for the Congo Basin clade. Immune deficiency appears to be a risk factors for severe disease. Children are also at higher risk and monkeypox during pregnancy may lead to complications, congenital monkeypox or stillbirth.Milder cases of monkeypox may go undetected and represent a risk of person-to-person transmission. There is likely to be little immunity to the infection in those travelling and exposed as endemic disease is geographically limited to parts of West and Central Africa.While a vaccine has been approved for prevention of monkeypox, and traditional smallpox vaccine also provides protection, these vaccines are not widely available and populations worldwide under the age of 40 or 50 years no longer benefit from the protection afforded by prior smallpox vaccination programmes.  Increased susceptibility to monkeypox is in part related to waning immunity due to cessation of smallpox immunization.The animal reservoir remains unknown, although is likely to be among small mammals. Contact with live and dead animals through hunting and consumption of wild game or bush meat are presumed drivers of human infection.  Any illness during travel in an endemic area or upon return should be reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel and immunization history. Residents and travellers to endemic countries should avoid contact with sick, dead or live animals that could harbor monkeypox virus (rodents, marsupials, primates) and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat). The importance of hand hygiene using soap and water, or alcohol-based sanitizer should be emphasized.Patient care for monkeypox is symptom-based optimal care. A patient with monkeypox should be provided with supportive care and treatment of underlying conditions and complications. In some circumstances, specific antiviral treatment approved for smallpox may be offered on a compassionate or emergency use basis.A patient with monkeypox should be isolated during the infectious period, just prior to and including the rash stage of the infection until all lesions have crusted and fallen off. Timely contact-tracing, surveillance measures and raising awareness of emerging diseases among health care providers are essential to effectively manage monkeypox outbreaks and prevent secondary cases.Health workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard, contact and droplet infection control precautions. This includes all workers such as cleaners and laundry personnel who may be exposed to the patient care setting, bedding, towels, or personal belongings.  Samples taken from people and animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.WHO does not recommend any restriction for travel to, or trade with, Nigeria or the USA based on available information at this time. The page or file you are trying to access cannot be found. This is because the web address is incorrect or the file has been moved or deleted.Please try the following:On 15 June 2021, a third case of monkeypox was confirmed in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (for more information on the first two cases, kindly see the WHO Disease Outbreak News (DON) published on  11 June 2021). The case developed a vesicular rash on 13 June 2021. Swabs of the lesions were received for diagnostic confirmation on 14 June and orthopoxvirus was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 15 June 2021.This case is a family member of the two cases diagnosed in the United Kingdom in May 2021. All three cases were admitted to a specialist infectious diseases unit. They have now fully recovered and been discharged from hospital.  The health authorities identified 30 close contacts of the cases and all have completed 21 days of active monitoring from their last date of exposure. No transmission outside the family has been identified.The health care workers caring for the three cases within the specialist infectious diseases unit have been vaccinated.Information about these three cases was shared with the Nigerian National IHR Focal Point who continue to gather further information regarding potential sources of infection and exposure in Nigeria. Active search has not yielded any cases related to the index case of this exportation. Animal health experts are collaborating in field activities to further explore potential sources of exposure.    Monkeypox is a sylvatic zoonosis with incidental human infections that usually occur sporadically in forested parts of Central and West Africa. It is caused by the monkeypox virus and belongs to the Orthopoxvirus family. Monkeypox can be transmitted by contact and droplet exposure via exhaled large droplets. The incubation period of monkeypox is usually from 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days.  The disease is often self-limiting with symptoms usually resolving spontaneously within 14-21 days. Symptoms can be mild or severe, and lesions can be very itchy or painful. Milder cases of monkeypox may go unreported and represent a risk of person-to-person transmission. The animal reservoir remains unknown, although is likely to be among rodents. Contact with live and dead animals through hunting and consumption of wild game or bush meat are known risk factors.There are two clades of monkeypox virus, the West African clade and Congo Basin (Central African) clade. Although the West African clade of monkeypox virus infection sometimes leads to severe illness in some individuals, disease is usually self-limiting. The case fatality ratio for the West African clade has been documented to be around 1%, whereas for the Congo Basin clade, it may be as high as 10%.To date, in the United Kingdom, there have been only seven cases of monkeypox reported, these three cases, three previously imported cases from Nigeria – two in September 2018 and one in December 2019 and one case of nosocomial transmission in a health care worker in England in 2018 due to contact with contaminated bed linen.As mentioned above, the third confirmed case is an extended close contact of the previous two cases and all cases are from the same household and have fully recovered. No additional contacts have been identified linked to this new case. None of the close contacts have travelled outside the United Kingdom following exposure. Therefore, this case does not change the public health risk in the country and the chance of further disease spread remains low. The possible source of exposure and risk of further spread in Nigeria is being assessed.For background information on monkeypox outbreaks in Nigeria, kindly see the DON published previously on 11 June 2021. Any illness during travel or upon return should be reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel and immunization history. Residents and travelers to endemic countries, such as Nigeria, should avoid contact with sick, dead or live animals that could harbor monkeypox virus (rodents, marsupials, primates) and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat). The importance of hand hygiene using soap and water or alcohol-based sanitizer should be emphasized.A patient with monkeypox should be isolated during the infectious period, i.e., during the rash stage of the illness, and contacts should be observed in quarantine. Timely contact tracing, surveillance measures and raising awareness of emerging diseases among health care providers are essential parts of preventing secondary cases and effective management of monkeypox outbreaks.Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard contact and droplet infection control precautions. Samples taken from people and animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably-equipped laboratories.WHO does not recommend any restriction for travel to, or trade with, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland or Nigeria based on available information at this time. WHO factsheet on monkeypox, 9 December 2019WHO monkeypox outbreak tool kitWHO disease outbreak news, Monkeypox, Nigeria 11 June 2021WHO disease outbreak news, monkeypox, Nigeria, 21 December 2017Weekly epidemiological record (WER) no.11, 16 March 2018, Emergence of monkeypox in West Africa and Central Africa 1970-2017Monkeypox: Introduction. Monkeypox online training moduleNigeria in NCDC weekly reportsNigeria monkeypox monthly situation report, 2017-2019On 19 June 2021, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Guinea declared the end of the Ebola outbreak that affected Nzérékoré Prefecture, Nzérékoré Region, Guinea. This was the first Ebola outbreak in Guinea since the large outbreak that affected West Africa in 2014-2016.This recent outbreak was announced on 14 February 2021 following the identification of a cluster of seven suspected Ebola cases in Gouécké and Nzérékoré City sub-prefectures in N’zérékoré prefecture. Between 14 February and 19 June 2021, a total of 23 cases (16 confirmed, 7 probable) were identified in four sub-prefectures of N’zérékoré Prefecture. Of these confirmed and probable cases 11 survived and 12 died. Five of the cases were health workers and one was a traditional health practitioner.The index case of this recent outbreak was a health worker.  She had onset of symptoms on 15 January 2021 and after seeking care at two health facilities and a traditional practitioner, died on 28 January 2021. She was buried on 1 February 2021 in Gouécké sub-prefecture without using safe and dignified burial practices.Seventeen secondary cases were reported with epidemiological links to the initial probable case between 5 February and 4 March 2021. After more than three weeks with no new cases reported, on 27 March 2021, a cluster of three community deaths was identified in Soulouta sub-prefecture, and were later classified as probable cases. Two individuals who had cared for and/ or attended these burials, were confirmed with Ebola infection in early April 2021. One of these last two confirmed cases was lost to follow up soon after he was confirmed on 1 April 2021 and until 18 June 2021 where he was found in apparent good health. Since 2 April 2021, no new confirmed or probable cases have been reported.  Laboratory:Surveillance: Points of entry (PoE):Vaccination:Patient management:Infection prevention and control activities (IPC)Risk communications activities included (RCCE):  Detection of EVD cases is not unexpected in Guinea given that the virus is enzootic in some animal populations in the country and can persist in certain body fluids of survivors. In a limited number of cases, secondary transmissions resulting from exposure to survivor’s body fluids have been documented in previous outbreaks. Investigations into the source of this outbreak using genomic sequencing,  demonstrated that the identified 2021 virus lineage was very closely related to a virus circulating in Guinea in 2014. However, the index case in this outbreak was not a known survivor of the 2014-2016 outbreak. They were however a health worker who is known to be at an increased risk of contracting EVD when infection prevention and control measures are not fully practiced as was likely in this situation. In-depth epidemiological investigations into the source of this outbreak have not drawn conclusive hypotheses to date, as to where and how the index case was infected. Thus, Investigations remain ongoing and a risk of additional undetected cases remains.A functioning surveillance system is key to detect cases of EVD however throughout this outbreak the surveillance system met several challenges. For example, only nine (39%) of the 23 cases were known contacts at the time of detection indicating that case investigation and contact listing was not comprehensive. Additionally, the alert system reported a suboptimal numbers of alerts and faced difficulties to investigate and test suspect cases of EVD. Neighboring prefectures of Nzérékoré also reported few alerts, even fewer of which were validated and tested demonstrating the challenges faced with surveillance in these remote hard-to-reach areas. Therefore, although 42 days after the last confirmed case tested negative for the second time the outbreak has been declared over (as per WHO recommendations) there remains a possibility that there are unrecognized chains of transmission in the community.WHO considers that ongoing challenges of access and epidemiological surveillance, coupled with the emergence of COVID-19 and a recent yellow fever outbreak, might challenge the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to a new EVD outbreak.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission:To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys and apes:To reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission from direct or close contact with people with EVD symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids:Activities that can support at-risk countries to prepare for future outbreaks include:To reduce the risk of possible transmission from virus persistence in some body fluids of survivors, WHO recommends providing medical care, psychological support and biological testing (until two consecutive negative tests) through an EVD survivors care programme. WHO does not recommend the isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has been tested negative for the Ebola virus. There also is a need to maintain collaborative relationships with survivors, survivor associations, their families, and their communities while monitoring individuals health to prevent further stigmatization.Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to Guinea.Ebola virus disease fact sheetOptimized Supportive Care for Ebola Virus Disease. Clinical management standard operating procedures. WHO. 2019. Weekly Outbreaks and Emergencies BulletinOn 25 May 2021, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland notified the WHO of one laboratory-confirmed case of monkeypox. The patient arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 May 2021. Prior to travel, the patient had lived and worked in Delta State, Nigeria.On arrival in the United Kingdom, the patient remained in quarantine with family due to COVID-19 restrictions. On 10 May, the patient developed a rash, beginning on the face. The patient remained in self-isolation for a further ten days and sought medical care for relief of symptoms. The patient was admitted to a referral hospital on 23 May. Skin lesion samples were received at the Public Health England Rare and Imported Pathogens Laboratory on 24 May. The West African clade of monkeypox virus was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 25 May.On 29 May, a family member with whom the patient quarantined developed lesions clinically compatible with monkeypox and was immediately isolated in an appropriate facility. Monkeypox was confirmed on 31 May. Both patients are stable and recovering. The health authorities of the United Kingdom activated an incident management team and implemented public health measures, including isolation of the index case and secondary case and contact tracing of all close contacts in the hospital and community. Follow up is being undertaken for the contacts of the two cases for 21 days after their last exposure. No close contacts have travelled outside the United Kingdom following exposure. Post-exposure vaccination was not offered to contacts.Information was shared with the Nigerian National IHR Focal Point who have initiated an outbreak investigation and are gathering further information regarding potential source of infection and exposures in Nigeria. Monkeypox is a sylvatic zoonosis with incidental human infections that usually occur sporadically in forested parts of Central and West Africa. It is caused by the monkeypox virus and belongs to the Orthopoxvirus family. Monkeypox can be transmitted by contact and droplet exposure via exhaled large droplets. The incubation period of monkeypox is usually from 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days.  The disease is often self-limiting with symptoms usually resolving spontaneously within 14-21 days. Symptoms can be mild or severe, and lesions can be very itchy or painful. Milder cases of monkeypox may go unreported and represent a risk of person-to-person transmission. The animal reservoir remains unknown, although is likely to be among rodents. Contact with live and dead animals through hunting and consumption of wild game or bush meat are known risk factors.There are two clades of monkeypox virus, the West African clade and Congo Basin (Central African) clade. Although the West African clade of monkeypox virus infection sometimes leads to severe illness in some individuals, disease is usually self-limiting. The case fatality ratio for the West African clade has been documented to be around 1% whereas for the Congo Basin clade it may be as high as 10%.Currently in the United Kingdom, including these two cases, there have been only six cases of monkeypox reported, including three previously imported cases from Nigeria, two in September 2018 and one in December 2019. Prior to this report, there was also one case of nosocomial transmission in a health worker in England in 2018 due to contact with contaminated bed linen. In the present case, the first patient was under quarantine with family members due to COVID-19 restrictions for a period of ten days after arrival in the country and an additional two days. Contacts possibly exposed are being monitored.  Once monkeypox was suspected, authorities in the United Kingdom promptly initiated appropriate public health measures, including isolation of the case and contact tracing. The second individual was isolating at home until onset of the rash and in hospital care thereafter. The risk of potential onward spread in the country is minimized.In 2017, Nigeria began to experience its first outbreak in 40 years. From the first cases in September 2017 to November 2019, a total of 183 confirmed cases and 9 deaths were recorded in   18 states (Rivers, Bayelsa, Cross River, Imo, Akwa  Ibom, Lagos, Delta, Bauchi, Federal Capital Territory (FCT), Abia, Oyo, Enugu, Ekiti, Nasarawa, Benue, Plateau, Edo, Anambra). The outbreak occurred primarily in southern parts of the country including Delta State. Public health measures included enhanced surveillance and health worker training, as well as isolation of cases, contact-tracing and quarantine. Since then, sporadic cases have continued to occur in Nigeria pointing to endemicity of the disease. In 2020, there were 14 suspected cases, three confirmed cases and no deaths. In 2021, a total of 32 suspected cases have been reported from January and May. Of the suspected cases, 7 were confirmed from five states Delta (2), Bayelsa (2), Lagos (1), Edo (1), Rivers (1) and no deaths were recorded.While a vaccine was approved for monkeypox in 2019, and traditional smallpox vaccine provides cross-protection for monkeypox, these vaccines are not widely available. There is likely to be little immunity to the infection in those exposed as endemic disease is geographically limited to West and Central Africa. Increased susceptibility of humans to monkeypox is thought to be related to waning immunity due to cessation of smallpox immunization. Populations worldwide under the age of 40 or 50 years no longer benefit from the protection afforded by prior smallpox vaccination programmes.Importations of monkeypox from an endemic country to another country not previously known to have cases have been documented on a total of eight, once in 2003 and the rest since 2018.The public health risk from this reported event is low in the United Kingdom. Monkeypox remains endemic in parts of West and Central Africa and represents an ongoing risk for further local outbreaks and travel-related cases. On this occasion, the confirmed index case has a history of travel from Delta State in Nigeria, where monkeypox has previously been reported. An investigation is underway in Delta State.Any illness during travel or upon return should be reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel and immunization history. Residents and travelers to endemic countries should avoid contact with sick, dead or live animals that could harbor monkeypox virus (rodents, marsupials, primates) and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat). The importance of hand hygiene using soap and water, or alcohol-based sanitizer should be emphasized.A patient with monkeypox should be isolated during the infectious period, that is during the rash stage of the illness, and contacts should be observed in quarantine. Timely contact tracing, surveillance measures and raising awareness of imported emerging diseases among health care providers are essential parts of preventing secondary cases and effective management of monkeypox outbreaks.Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard, contact and droplet infection control precautions. Samples taken from people and animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.WHO factsheet on monkeypox, 9 December 2019  WHO monkeypox outbreak tool kitWHO disease outbreak news, monkeypox, Nigeria, 21 December 2017; 5 October 2018WHO disease outbreak news, monkeypox, all. 1997 – 2020Weekly epidemiological record (WER) no.11, 16 March 2018, Emergence of monkeypox in West Africa and Central Africa 1970-2017Monkeypox: Introduction. Monkeypox online training module. 2020. Outbreak Channel. OpenWHO. English; FrançaisNigeria in NCDC weekly reports. Nigeria monkeypox monthly situation report, 2017-2019 On 31 May 2021, the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A(H10N3) virus. This is the first case of human infection with avian influenza A(H10N3) virus reported globally. The case is a 41-year-old male from Zhenjiang City, Jiangsu Province. He developed fever and nausea on 23 April 2021 and was admitted to the intensive care unit of a local hospital on 28 April 2021. The case is currently in a stable condition. The National Influenza Center of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, a WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza, completed genetic sequencing and analysis of the specimen and confirmed the detection of an influenza A(H10N3) virus of avian origin.The case had no clear history of exposure to poultry prior to illness onset, based on epidemiological investigation. No avian influenza A(H10N3) virus has been found in the local surroundings or poultry. Close contacts of the case have not shown any symptoms. Based on the local and national assessment, the case was considered to be an incidental infection from avian to human transmission, with a low likelihood of human-to-human transmission.The Chinese government has taken the following monitoring, prevention and control measures: This is the first human infection with avian influenza A(H10N3) to be detected. Previously, Australia and Egypt detected human infections with influenza A(H10N7), and China reported three human infections with avian influenza A(H10N8) in late 2013 and early 2014. Targeted surveillance projects have detected avian influenza A(H10N3) viruses in birds, however the extent of circulation and epidemiology of this virus in birds is unclear. Further genetic and antigenic characterization are ongoing to determine if this virus is different from previously detected avian influenza A(H10Nx) viruses.Most previously reported human infections with avian influenza viruses were due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Since avian influenza viruses, including A(H10Nx) viruses, continue to be detected in poultry populations, further sporadic human cases could be detected in the future. Currently available epidemiologic information suggests that avian influenza A(H10Nx) viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained human-to-human transmission, thus the likelihood of spread among humans is low. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely. The risk assessment will be reviewed as necessary, should further epidemiological or virological information become available.  The detection of this case does not change current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza. The public should avoid contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms and live poultry, or surfaces that might be contaminated by poultry or bird faeces. Hand hygiene with frequent washing or use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer is recommended. WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travelers, and advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions in relation to this event based on the currently available information.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human or animal health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.All human infections caused by a new subtype of influenza virus are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. Thorough investigation of every human infection is essential. On 3 May 2021, the Minister of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) declared the end of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak that affected four health zones (HZ) Biena, Musienene, Katwa, and Butembo within North Kivu province. The declaration was made in accordance with WHO recommendations, 42 days after the last confirmed case tested negative for the second time on 21 March 2021.The outbreak was declared on 7 February 2021 after a resident in Mwenye/Makumo in Masoya Health Area in Biena HZ tested positive for EVD. To date, the source of infection of the initial case in this outbreak is yet to be determined. Overall, 12 cases were reported (11 confirmed and 1 probable). Of these 12 cases, eight (73%) were known and followed contacts at time of detection, and all were linked epidemiologically within a unique chain of transmission. All 12 EVD cases were reported in four health zones of North Kivu Province with onset of symptoms reported between 25 January and 26 February 2021. Of these cases, six died and six recovered after receiving appropriate treatment. Two of the 12 cases were health workers who contracted the infection while caring for the initial case in this outbreak, both survived. The last confirmed cases were reported on 1 March 2021, all among family members of a confirmed cases.This was the 12th EVD outbreak reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the virus was first identified in 1976, and the second in North Kivu Province.During the outbreak, from 7 February to 3 May 2021, case investigations into all confirmed and probable cases identified 1 194 contacts in 48 health areas of five health zones. To date, all contacts have completed their 21 day follow up period. A dedicated team continued to search for contacts who were lost to follow up, never seen or displaced during the 42 days since the last exposure to a confirmed EVD case to ensure that transmission chains were not missed. Over the course of the outbreak, 33 229 alerts were reported from 17 health zones of the Butembo and Beni division of the provincial department of Health. Additionally, over 1.5 million travellers were screened at points of entry of DRC, and nearly 2 000 individuals were vaccinated against EVD. The Public Health response was coordinated by the Provincial Department of Health, Butembo division in collaboration with WHO.In response to this EVD outbreak, from 7 February 2021 to 3 May 2021: On 3 May 2021, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the end of human-to-human transmission of EVD over in North Kivu Province considering that more than 42 days (two maximum incubation periods) had elapsed since the date of the second consecutive negative test of the last confirmed case. The World Health Organization assess that the surveillance system in place has proven its capacity to detect cases. The Ministry of Health drafted a 90-day plan which includes the strengthening and consolidation of public health surveillance systems.WHO notes  that there remains a risk of re-emergence of EVD.  Ebola virus is enzootic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and it can persist in some body fluids of survivors for several months which, in rare events, may result in secondary transmission. In addition, it is not unusual for sporadic cases to occur following a major outbreak. Re-emergence of EVD is a major public health issue in the DRC and there are still gaps in the country’s capacity to prepare for and respond to outbreaks. A confluence of environmental and socioeconomic factors such as poverty, community mistrust, weak health systems, and political instability is accelerating the rate of the emergence of EVD in the DRC.Other health emergencies such as coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), cholera and measles outbreaks may jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to re-emergence of EVD cases.Since 10 March 2020, when the first confirmed COVID-19 case was registered in DRC a total of 29 962 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 766 deaths have been reported nationwide as of 1st May 2021.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce Ebola virus disease transmission in humans:Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Between 1 January 2021 and 11 March 2021, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported seven additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV) infection, including three associated deaths. Additional death was reported from a previously reported case (Case #2, please see Disease outbreak news published on 1 February 2021). The cases were reported from Riyadh (four cases), Jeddah (one case), Al-Ahsaa (one case), Makkah (one case) regions. The link below provides details of the seven reported casesSince 2012 until 11 March 2021, a total of 2574 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV and 886 associated deaths were reported globally to WHO under the International Health regulations (IHR 2005). The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.  Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in health care settings. The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. However, with the current COVID-19 pandemic, the testing capacity for MERS-CoV have been severely affected in many countries since most of the resources have been redirected towards SARS-CoV-2.  The Ministry of Health of Saudi Arabia is working to increase the testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV infections.WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedaries, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures or in settings where aerosol generating procedures are conducted.Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, supported quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures and clear and consistent risk communication can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.  A global update on circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreaks and events is summarized below, as of February 2021.In 2020, 959 human cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) and 411 cVDPV2-positive environmental samples were reported globally from 27 countries, of which 21 countries were from the African Region and six countries from reported from the regions of the Eastern Mediterranean, Europe and the Western Pacific. The number of cVDPV cases and environmental samples increased in 2020 compared to 2019 when 366 cVDPV2 cases and 173 cVDPV2-positive environmental samples were reported.The latest epidemiological information on circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus is updated on a weekly basis. Since 2017, several genetically-distinct cVDPV2 outbreaks continue to be reported across the Region. In total, 21 countries are affected by ongoing cVDPV2, and outbreak response activities continue to be implemented in Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of Congo, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan and Togo. Afghanistan has reported co-circulation of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and cVDPV2. In 2020, 56 WPV1 cases and 35 environmental samples positive for WPV 1 were reported; 307 cases of cVDPV2 and 172 environmental samples positive for cVDVP2 were reported. Of the 307 cVDPV2 cases reported in acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases in 2020, 199 (65%) genetically derived from the Pakistan- Gilgit-Baltistan -1 emergence which originated in Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan. The remaining 108 cases were classified as a new emergence from Afghanistan; 105 cases were classified as AFG-NGR-1 and 3 as AFG-HLD-1. As of February 2021, 11 cVDPV2 cases and nine environmental samples positive for cVDVP2 were reported in 2021.Pakistan is one of the two endemic countries for polio, and has reported co-circulation of WPV1 and cVDPV2. In 2020, 84 WPV1 cases and 407 environmental samples positive for WPV1 were reported. Among the 84 WPV1 cases, 60 were reported in the first half of 2020 while the remaining 24 cases were reported in the second half (compared to 103 cases during the same period in 2019). As of 28 February 2021, Pakistan has reported one case of WPV1 in 2021.In 2020, 135 cVDPV2 cases and 135 environmental samples positive for cVDPV2 were reported from Pakistan. Since the beginning of 2021, there have been six cVDPV2 cases and ten cVDPV2 positive environmental samples reported to date. The cVDPV2 outbreak poses increased risk of spread to neighboring countries, and cVDPV2 has been detected from Iran and Tajikistan.Sudan continues to report a cVDPV2 outbreak, which originated in Chad, with 57 cases reported in 2020.Somalia continues to report a cVDPV2 outbreak, with three cVDPV2 cases in 2019 and 14 cVDPV2 cases in 2020.  In 2021, cVDPV2 linked to Somalia was detected in Kenya.In Tajikistan, the first cVDPV2 case with onset of AFP on 22 November 2020 was reported from Khatlon province. cVDPV2 detected from this case was linked to cVDPV2 currently circulating in Pakistan. In February 2020, cVDPV2 was identified in another AFP case in Khatlon province, as well as in a healthy child from Vahdat district close to the capital, Dushanbe.  On 8 March 2021, two more AFP cases with cVDPV2 were confirmed in Hisor district. Three environmental samples from the newly established surveillance site in Dushanbe were reported cVDPV2 positive. In the Philippines, outbreak response to a cVDPV2 outbreak, which emerged in 2019, is continuing.  A total of 13 cases have been associated with this outbreak in the country; 12 in 2019 and one in 2020. No cVDPV2 cases have been reported since January 2020.  However, after the use of type 2 monovalent oral polio vaccine (mOPV2) in large-scale polio supplementary immunization activities (SIAs), one case of ambiguous vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (aVDPV2) was detected in 2020. Separately, the country is also affected by a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 1 (cVDPV1) outbreak, with two cases reported in the country in 2019. No cVDPV1 cases have been reported since December 2019.The cVDPV2 outbreak response in Malaysia is also continuing. No cases of cVDPV2 have been reported since March 2020 while several environmental samples tested positive for cVDPV2. All of them were genetically linked with cVDPV2 in the Philippines. Malaysia is also affected by the cVDPV1 outbreak and the response is ongoing. Four cases have been associated with this outbreak in the country, three in 2019 and one in 2020. All cases were genetically linked with the cases detected in the Philippines. No cases of cVDPV1 have been detected since March 2020.According to the WHO-UNICEF routine immunization estimates, inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) coverage was estimated to be 41% and 99% in Philippines and Malaysia respectively in 2019. In 2019 and early 2020, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) developed the Strategy for the Response to type 2 circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus 2020–2021 to more effectively address the evolving cVDPV2 epidemiology, including as appropriate through the roll-out of an improved vaccine, novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2), through the WHO Emergency Use Listing.  This strategy is in line with Executive Board Decision from 7 February 2020, which also called for the mobilization of domestic financial resources to complement international financial and political commitments, to address the evolving cVDPV2 emergency.African Region: The African Region completed assessments of existing outbreaks and based on the findings and recommendations, and in accordance with global guidelines, this led to the closure of 18 genetically-distinct outbreaks in 2020 in six countries: Angola, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Zambia. Countries across the region are continuing to implement response in line with international outbreak response guidelines, supported by the Regional Rapid Response Team. Eastern Mediterranean Region: The regional Incident Management Support Team (IMST), jointly coordinated by WHO and UNICEF, is supporting countries in their outbreak response and field investigation efforts. To ensure greater engagement of government leadership and provide additional support to both affected countries in the Region, WHO established the Ministerial Regional Subcommittee on Polio Eradication and Outbreaks, which is planned to convene in mid-March 2021.The national Polio eradication programme in Pakistan is determined to interrupt the circulation of cVDPV2 by June 2021 and WPV1 by June 2022 as a key component of the broader health and economic COVID-19 recovery process.European Region: In Tajikistan, local health authorities are preparing to fast-track response with nOPV2 campaigns. According to the WHO-UNICEF routine immunization estimates, IPV coverage was estimated to be 96% in 2019.African Region: WHO considers there to be very high risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 due to the low population immunity against poliovirus type 2 (PV2) and low IPV vaccination coverage. This in conjunction with the existence of known viruses that have persisted for over one year, large-scale population movements, and ongoing challenges for country’s public health systems due to the COVID-19 epidemic and other infectious disease outbreaks in the Region.Eastern Mediterranean Region: WHO considers there to be a high risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2, based on existence of known polioviruses that have persisted in the population/environment for over one year, large inaccessible populations in some countries, where large pockets of low population immunity arise as a result.European Region: WHO considers there to be a low to moderate risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 in the Region.Western Pacific Region: WHO considers there to be a low to moderate risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2.In all instances, the continued spread of existing outbreaks as well as the emergence of new outbreaks of cVDPV2 point to gaps in routine immunization coverage in addition to insufficient reactive vaccination as an outbreak response, with monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2). The risk of further spread of such strains, or the emergence of new strains in 2021 is magnified by an increasing gap in global mucosal-immunity to type 2 poliovirus and dropping immunization rates related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.In its report from its most recent meeting in February 2021, the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (2005) on the international spread of poliovirus expressed concern at the continued rapid spread of cVDPV2, and noted that the risk of international spread of cVDPV2 is currently very high and urged the implementation of advice aimed at reducing this risk.  It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel. As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.As of 26 March 2021, updates on polioviruses will no longer be published on the Disease Outbreak News website. Instead, a Disease Outbreak News will serve as an alert when a change in polio the epidemiological situation worldwide is noted by GPEI, who closely monitor the situation on a weekly basis. For further information, see the GPEI weekly report.On 2 February 2021, the National IHR Focal Point of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) notified WHO of one (1) laboratory-confirmed case of MERS-CoV.The case is a 39-year-old male national, owner of a camel farm. He developed fever and cough on 18 January and visited a private hospital several times with no improvement.  The condition of the case worsened, and on 24 January, a chest X-ray confirmed the diagnosis of pneumonia. On 26 January, he was admitted to a private hospital and was transferred to a governmental hospital on 28 January. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 31 January and tested positive for MERS-CoV by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on 1 February at the Shiekh Khalifa Medical Center laboratory in Abu Dhabi. He has no underlying conditions. SARS-CoV-2 testing was performed more than once, and it was negative. No history of previous infection or exposure to SARS-CoV-2 was reported. The case reported a history of close contact with dromedary camels at his farm in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. No travel history was reported during the same period. Currently, the patient is in stable condition.The first MERS-CoV case in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) was reported in July 2013. Since then, a total of 92 cases of MERS-CoV (including the above case) and 12 associated deaths have been reported in the United Arab Emirates. At a global level, from 2012 until 2 February 2021, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2567 with 882 associated deaths. Most of the cases have been reported from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with the affected Member States.In UAE, the surveillance for MERS-CoV during the COVID-19 pandemic mandate testing for all cases meeting severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) definition. Upon identification, an incident report, case investigation, and contact tracing were initiated. The investigation included screening of all close contacts at household and healthcare facilities. All identified contacts of the confirmed case were monitored on a daily basis for the appearance of respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms for 14 days after their last exposure to the confirmed case. All of them have completed the 14-day monitoring period and no further cases were reported. Additionally, all close contacts of the patients have been tested for MERS-CoV and so far all are negative.The veterinary authorities have been notified and investigation in animals is ongoing.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated limited ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings. The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. However, with the current COVID-19 pandemic, the testing capacity for MERS-CoV have been severely affected in many countries since most of the resources have been redirected towards SARS-CoV-2. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures.Early identification, case management, and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) On 18 February 2021, the National IHR Focal Point for the Russian Federation notified WHO of detection of avian influenza A(H5N8) in seven human clinical specimens. These are the first reported detection of avian influenza A(H5N8) in humans. Positive clinical specimens were collected from poultry farm workers who participated in a response operation to contain an avian influenza A(H5N8) outbreak detected in a poultry farm in Astrakhan Oblast in the Russian Federation. The laboratory confirmation of the seven specimens were performed by the State Research Centre for Virology and Biotechnology VECTOR (WHO H5 Reference Laboratory). The age of seven positive cases ranged between 29 to 60 years and five were female.Between 3 and 11 December, a total of 101 000 of 900 000 egg laying hens on the farm died. This high mortality rate prompted an investigation. Samples were collected from these birds and an initial detection of avian influenza A(H5N8) was performed by the Russian regional veterinary laboratory. On 11 December, the outbreak was confirmed by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) Reference laboratory, and the Federal Centre for Animal Health (FGBI-ARRIAH), in Vladimir, the Russian Federation. Outbreak containment operations started immediately and continued for several days due to the large size of the poultry farm.In addition to operations on the farm, acute and convalescent sera was collected from the seven positive human cases for serological testing. The results were suggestive of recent infection.The cases remained asymptomatic for the whole follow-up duration (several weeks). Follow-up nasopharyngeal swabs were collected during medical observation period and were tested negative for avian influenza A(H5N8). No obvious clinical manifestations were reported from any farm workers under medical surveillance, their family members, or other close contacts of the seven cases.Influenza A(H5N8) viruses isolated from this poultry outbreak in Astrakhan belonged to clade 2.3.4.4b of avian influenza A(H5Nx) viruses. In 2020, avian influenza A (H5N8) viruses were also detected in poultry or wild birds in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Germany, Hungary, Iraq, Japan, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, the United Kingdom, and the Russian Federation.On receiving the initial signal of a probable outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) at the poultry farm on 3 December 2020, the national authorities took immediate measures including cessation of poultry production cycles, and product transportation from the affected farm.Between 11 and 18 December, several measures including culling and disposing of poultry, eggs, litter and disinfection of contaminated premises were taken as part of outbreak response activitiesDuring and after the culling of all the poultry, nasopharyngeal swabs and serum samples were collected from poultry farm workers and personnel involved in outbreak response at the farm. The surveillance activities, both within and outside of the containment area, was intensified. A total of 24 close contacts of the confirmed cases have been identified and traced. In total, 150 individuals were monitored for clinical indication of respiratory disease and received antiviral prophylaxis therapy. No symptoms were reported among these individuals.Whole Genome Sequencing of avian influenza A (H5N8) viruses isolated from poultry and from one of the seven human cases was performed and were uploaded to the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) database on 20 February 2021. Genetic and phenotypic characterization of the virus is ongoing.WHO is following up with the public health authorities in the Russian Federation, including implementation of public health measures warranted by such events, and with the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) on further analysis and assessment of the virus materials and serum samples. On 20 February, a special briefing by the head of the Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights Protection and Human Wellbeing was organized for the state Russian media to inform the public about these cases and the implications.Since 2004, avian influenza A(H5) viruses have spread from Asia to Europe via wild birds. The genetic clade 2.3.4.4 H5 viruses have often reassorted among other avian influenza viruses, resulting in avian influenza A(H5N1), A(H5N2), A(H5N3), A(H5N5), A(H5N6) and A(H5N8) viruses, some of which have been detected in birds in many countries .In the Russian Federation, avian influenza A(H5N8) of clade 2.3.4.4 was isolated for the first time in 2014 in a wild bird in the northern region of Russian Far East.As mentioned earlier, all the seven cases with PCR-positive results were clinically asymptomatic. All close contacts of these cases were clinically monitored, and no one showed signs of clinical illness. Infections with avian influenza viruses of the same clade (H5 clade 2.3.4.4) have been reported from China since 2014 in people with exposure to infected birds. The likelihood of human infections with influenza A(H5N8) viruses has been considered to be low.Further genetic and antigenic characterization and information on seroconversion among contacts of the positive cases is required to fully assess the risk.The development of zoonotic influenza candidate vaccine viruses for potential use in human vaccines, coordinated by WHO, remains an essential component of the overall global strategy for influenza pandemic preparedness.Based on currently available information, the risk of human-to-human transmission remains low.These cases do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of animal and seasonal human influenza, which should continue to be implemented. Respiratory transmission occurs mainly by droplets, disseminated by unprotected coughs and sneezes. Short-distance airborne transmission of influenza viruses may occur, particularly in crowded enclosed spaces. Hand contamination, direct inoculation of virus, exposure to infected birds or virus-contaminated materials or environments are potential sources of infection.When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, the people involved in specific, high-risk tasks such as sampling sick birds, culling and disposing of infected birds, eggs, litter and cleaning of contaminated premises should be trained on how to protect themselves, and on proper use of personal protective equipment (PPE) . People involved in these tasks should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for seven days following the last day of contact with poultry or their environments.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.Thorough investigation of all potential novel influenza human infections is warranted. All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR), and State Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by new influenza A subtype with the potential to cause a pandemic (please see case definitions for diseases requiring notification under the IHR ). Evidence of illness is not required.In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection, a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted, even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization.Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.Based on the currently available information, WHO advises against any special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions on travel and/or trade with the Russian Federation. On 14 February 2021, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Guinea informed WHO of a cluster of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) cases in the sub-prefecture of Gouécké, Nzérékoré Region, Guinea between 18 January and 13 February 2021. The cases showed symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting and bleeding after attending the burial of another relative (a 51 year-old nurse) on 1 February 2021.The index case of the cluster was a nurse who had originally presented at a health centre in Gouécké on 18 January 2021 with headache, physical weakness, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, and fever. She was diagnosed with typhoid. She sought a second consultation at a health facility in Nzérékoré on 23 January 2021 for fever, vomiting, liquid stools, and physical weakness, and she was diagnosed with malaria. On 24 January she consulted a traditional practitioner in Nzérékoré, and she died on 28 January 2021. She was buried unsafely on 1 February in Gouécké. The other six cases are the five family members and the traditional practitioner she visited.Among the seven cases, five have died (4 probable and 1 confirmed). The other two confirmed cases are currently in isolation in dedicated health care facilities in Conakry and Gouécké, Nzérékoré region.The Ebolavirus species is not yet determined. Additional laboratory analyses are on-going to ascertain virus species.As of 15 February, one hundred and ninety-two (192) contacts have been identified, including 164 contacts in N’Zérékoré Health District and 28 in Ratoma Health District, Conakry. To date, no contacts have been reported to have travelled in neighboring countries. However, Nzérékoré is the second-largest city in Guinea and lies at the intersection of roads from Ganta (in Liberia), Danané (Côte d’Ivoire), and roads to other major hubs in Guinea like Kankan and Macenta in (Guinea). Therefore, there is concern about the exportation of EVD cases into the neighboring countries. On 14 February 2021, following the declaration of the EVD outbreak, the MoH of Guinea convened a crisis meeting.The MoH , WHO, Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) partners, have initiated measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread. To coordinate the response, the MoH activated the national and district emergency management committees. They also advised the public to take measures to avert the spread of the disease, and to report any persons with symptoms to seek care. Multidisciplinary teams have been deployed to the field to; actively search and provide care for cases, trace and follow-up contacts, and sensitize communities on infection prevention and control. Planned and in-progress response measures include the following:WHO support for the Guinean authorities WHO considers the risk of spread in the country as very high given the unknown size, duration and origin of the outbreak; potentially large number of contacts; potential spread to other parts of Guinea and neighboring countries; limited response capacity currently on the ground; and unknown virus strain. In addition, there are ongoing challenges for the public health system due to the COVID-19 epidemic, and recent yellow fever and measles outbreaks.WHO assess the risk for the region as high. The Nzérékoré Region of Guinea shares borders with Sierra Leone and Liberia, where EVD outbreaks occurred previously. Despite some movement restrictions across official border-crossings due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, a significant proportion of cross-border movement continues to take place and poses a risk of EVD spread. It is therefore essential that neighboring countries assess their preparedness capacities and implement readiness/response measures.The countries in the region should: WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission:Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to Guinea.  Rift Valley fever (RVF) has been reported in Kenya in humans in Isiolo and Mandera counties and in animals in Isiolo, Mandera, Murang’a and Garissa counties. As of 4 February 2021, there were a total of 32 human cases (14 confirmed positive), and 11 deaths (CFR 34 %).Isiolo CountyThe event is believed to have started on 19 November 2020, with deaths among herders presenting with symptoms of fever, headache, general malaise with or without nausea, epistaxis/hematemesis, and abdominal pain/diarrhoea reported to the County Department of Health in Isiolo. The first human case was reported in late November 2020 from Sericho ward in Garbatulla Subcounty. Deaths have been reported in Gafarsa and Erisaboru within Garbatulla subcounty as well Korbesa in Merti subcounty. On 16 December, RVF was confirmed by PCR at the National Virology Laboratory (NVL), Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI). As of 4 February 2021, a total of 22 human cases had been reported (12 confirmed positive), and 10 deaths (three confirmed positive). Most cases were from Garbatulla subcounty, with the majority being herders, male, and aged 13 to 70 years old.Sheep and goats were also reported sick on 19 November 2020 in Sericho subcounty, which is mainly pastoral. The communities in this area live in villages and livestock are grazed in communal grazing areas. Animal samples tested IgM and real time PCR positive for RVF at the Central Veterinary Laboratory (CVL), Kabete and the Regional Veterinary Investigation Laboratory in Garissa. The event was officially confirmed on 7 January 2021 and reported to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) on 15 January 2021 and later on 22 and 29 January 2021. As of 27 January, a total of 20 livestock samples (19 sheep and 1 camel) had tested positive for RVF by IgM-capture ELISA and real-time PCR.Mandera CountyA patient from Kalmalab village, Mandera North subcounty fell ill after he was involved in the slaughter of four sick camels. He was evacuated to a Nairobi hospital with haemorrhagic symptoms on 18 January. He was later admitted to the Intensive Care Unit with multiple organ failure. RVF was confirmed on 21 January at the NVL. He died on 22 January 2021. As of 4 February 2021, a total of 10 cases (2 confirmed RVF positive), including 1 death had been reported from Mandera North sub county.Kalmalab village borders the river Dawa which broke its banks following rains in the Ethiopian highlands. The RVF outbreak may be associated with this flooding, as it increases the risk of mosquito-borne zoonosis. Livestock samples have been submitted to CVL Kabete for testing.Murang’a CountyLivestock with RVF syndromes (including bleeding and abortions) were first reported on 29 December 2020 in Gatanga subcounty, Kihumbuini ward. The first animal death was reported on 1 January 2021. Samples were collected from the same farm on 1 January and were confirmed RVF positive on 3 January at CVL Kabete using Elisa IgG/IgM testing. More suspected animal cases have been reported in Ng’araria ward in Kandara subcounty. No human cases have been confirmed, however suspected cases were traced and samples from affected households were collected on 25 January for testing at NVL.Garissa CountySamples from suspected livestock (sheep and goats) were collected from Masalani, Ijara Subcounty and Balambala, Balambala Subcountrym on 20 December 2020 for testing and were confirmed positive for RVF on 22 December using Elisa IgM testing. Field investigations are ongoing to determine the extent of the outbreak.Surveillance in livestock was initiated after the detection of the RVF outbreak in Isiolo. Outbreaks among animals were observed during this time period. In December 2020, results from CVL Kabete taken from 120 livestock revealed 20 (19 sheep out of which 10 died, and 1 camel) positive RVF cases confirmed by Elisa IgM testing. Further laboratory analysis are ongoing in both human and livestock samples.  WHO is working closely with the Ministry of Health via the local health cluster alongside the FAO and OIE in supporting the following public health activities in response to the outbreak: RVF outbreaks are recurrent in Kenya and there have been several RVF outbreaks in the past (1998, 2006-2007, 2014, 2018). The current outbreak affecting humans and animals in Isiolo (Ewaso Nyiro), Mandera (Dawa) and Garissa counties is associated with rivers flooding. There was no flooding/rainfall in Muranga; outbreaks are around swampy areas, and quarry lakes. Contact with infected animals was associated with human infection. Herders, farmers, slaughterhouse workers, and veterinarians have an increased risk of infection. Isiolo and Garissa counties are pastoral communities (primarily sheep and goats) where livestock are grazed in communal grazing areas.The onset of the event began in Sericho, Isiolo county around 19 November 2020. RVF outbreaks were later reported in Balambala and Ijara Subcounties, Garissa county on 7 December 2020 that were attributed to flooding along the Ewaso Basin whose river burst its banks in early November 2020. This then led livestock to migrate and graze along the marshy areas of the nearby riverbank. The location of the event is currently reported in four counties within Kenya. Yet, given the favourable environmental conditions (heavy rainfall and flooding) that can increase the presence of disease vectors, along with uncontrolled movement of viraemic animals (in search of water and pasture), there is an increased risk of disease spreading to other parts within Kenya and to neighbouring countries. It should be highlighted that an RVF outbreak will have a severe economic impact on this pastoral community that is dependent on livestock production. The last animal vaccination for RVF was in 2018, but the exact coverage is unknown. Although the country has local capacity, response measures remain insufficient. Vector control measures have not been conducted and a national vector control plan has yet to be developed.The first confirmed COVID-19 case was registered in Kenya on 12 March 2020. As of 8 February 2021, Kenya had reported 101 819 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 1,779 deaths.. The impact of the pandemic has led to a wide-spread shortage of supplies necessary to mount an effective RVF response such as Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). Furthermore, surveillance officers and laboratory services have largely prioritised the COVID-19 response. Rift Valley fever is a mosquito-borne zoonosis primarily affecting domestic animals (such as sheep, goats, and camels). Humans get infected through contact with viraemic animals and their fluids (blood, etc.). Human cases often occur in proximity to outbreaks in livestock in an environment favourable for mosquito vectors that also transmit the virus to animals and sometimes to humans. The majority of human infections result from direct or indirect contact with the blood, bodily fluids or tissues of infected animals. Awareness of the risk factors of RVF infection, integrated vector control activities and protective measures against mosquito bites is essential in reducing human infection and deaths. Public health messages for risk reduction should focus on:WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Kenya or the affected area based on the current information available on this event. On 7 February 2021, the Minister of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared an outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) after the laboratory confirmation of one case in North Kivu Province. The case was an adult female living in Biena Health Zone. To date the source of infection is still under investigation.On 25 January 2021, the case presented with nasal bleeding. From 25 January to 1 February, she reportedly received outpatient care at a local health centre. From 1 to 3 February, she was admitted to a second health centre with signs of physical weakness, dizziness, joint pain, epigastric pain, liquid stools, headache and difficulty breathing. On 3 February, a blood sample was collected for EVD testing due to her epidemiological link with an EVD survivor. On the same day, she was referred to a hospital in Katwa Health Zone (part of Butembo city) following the deterioration of her condition. She was admitted to the intensive care unit the same day and died on 4 February. On 5 February, the body was buried in Musienene Health Zone, however not under safe burial practices.On 6 February, Butembo laboratory confirmed the case positive for EVD by GeneXpert. On 7 February, the sample was shipped to Goma laboratory, and tested positive for EVD by GeneXpert on 8 February. Samples were sent to the Institut de Recherche Biomedicale for next generation sequencing in order to determine whether this recent Ebola case is linked to a new spill over event or to a resurgence of the outbreak that affected North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces in 2018-2020.As of 8 February 2021, a total of 117 contacts has been identified and are under follow up. Investigations and response activities are ongoing. There are currently therapeutics (Regeneron and mAb114) available for up to 400 patients in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Preliminary information indicates that the patient visited at least three health facilities in two health zones and was unsafely buried in a third health zone. There is therefore a risk of EVD spreading to other health zones. WHO is closely monitoring the situation and the risk assessment will be updated as more information becomes available.The resurgence is not unexpected given that EVD is endemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that Ebola virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region. The risk of re-emergence through exposure to animal hosts or bodily fluids of Ebola survivors cannot be excluded. In addition, it is not unusual for sporadic cases to occur following a major outbreak.There are a number of ongoing challenges for surveillance, including access to affected areas and community mistrust toward authorities and outbreak responders. Other health emergencies such as coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), cholera and measles outbreaks may jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to re-emergence of EVD cases.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans:To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys and apes:To reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission from direct or close contact with people with EVD symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids:To reduce the risk of possible transmission from virus persistence in some body fluids of survivors, WHO recommends providing medical care, psychological support and biological testing (until two consecutive negative tests) through an EVD survivors care programme. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has been tested negative for Ebola virus. On 13 January, 2021, a child under 18 years of age in Wisconsin developed respiratory disease. A respiratory specimen was collected on 14 January. Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing conducted at the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene indicated a presumptive positive influenza A(H3N2) variant virus infection. The specimen was forwarded to the Influenza Division of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on 21 January for further testing. On 22 January, CDC confirmed an influenza A (H3N2)v virus infection using RT-PCR and genome sequence analysis. Investigation into the source of the infection has been completed and revealed that the child lives on a farm with swine present. Sampling of the swine on the property for influenza virus has not yet been conducted but is planned. Five family members of the patient reported respiratory illness during the investigation and were tested for influenza; all tested negative. The patient was prescribed antiviral treatment and was not hospitalized and has made a full recovery. No human to human transmission has been identified associated with this investigation.Sequencing of the virus by CDC revealed it is similar to A (H3N2) viruses circulating in swine in the mid-western United States during 2019-2020. Viruses related to this A (H3N2)v virus were previously circulating as human seasonal A (H3N2) viruses until around 2010-2011 when they entered the USA swine population. Thus, past vaccination or infection with human seasonal A (H3N2) virus is likely to offer some protection in humans.This is the first influenza A (H3N2)v virus identified in the United States in 2021. Since 2005, a total of 485 influenza variant virus human infections caused by all subtypes including 437 human infections with A (H3N2)v, including this one, have been reported in the United States.  According to the International Health Regulations (IHR), human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact. A novel influenza A virus is considered to have the potential to cause a pandemic if (1) the virus has demonstrated the capacity to infect and transmit efficiently among humans; and (2) differs from currently-circulating seasonal human influenza viruses such that the hemagglutinin (HA) gene (or protein) is not a mutated form of those, i.e. A/H1 or A/H3, circulating widely in the human population; and (3) the population has little to no immunity against it. Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease. Nevertheless, human infections with these viruses need to be monitored closely.CDC and Wisconsin State Authorities have taken the following monitoring, prevention and control measuresSince 2005, there has been some limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses, but no ongoing community transmission has been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood is low.Swine influenza viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic characteristics of these viruses differ. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine (but not people) is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. Most human cases are the result of exposure to swine influenza viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations around the world, further human cases can be expected.Influenza viruses that infect pigs may be different from human influenza viruses. Thus, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. In addition, pigs are susceptible to avian, human and swine influenza viruses; they may get infected with influenza viruses from different species at the same time. If this happens, it is possible for the genes of these viruses to mix and create a new virus. This type of major change in the influenza A viruses is known as antigenic shift. If this new virus causes illness in people and can be transmitted easily from person-to-person with no immunity, an influenza pandemic can occur.The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. Due to the evolution influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virologic, epidemiologic and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health with timely sharing of such viruses and related information for further characterization and risk assessment.This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of seasonal influenza. All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report .Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and potentially contaminated environments and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travellers. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it recommend that any travel or trade restrictions be applied.In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization. Between 1 June through 31 December 2020, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported four additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV) with one associated death. The cases were reported from Riyadh (two cases), Taif (one case), and Al-Ahsaa (one case) Regions. The link below provides details of the four reported cases.From 2012 through 31 December 2020, a total of 2566 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV and 882 associated deaths were reported globally to WHO under the International Health regulations (IHR 2005). The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. However, with the current COVID-19 pandemic, the testing capacity for MERS-CoV have been severely affected in many countries since most of the resources have been redirected towards SARS-CoV-2. The Ministry of Health of Saudi Arabia is working to increase the testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV infections.WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedaries, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting or household contacts).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns. Given limited capacities in countries for testing, WHO advises that countries should test all suspect MERS-CoV cases, and a subset sample of severe acute respiratory infections for MERS-CoV.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. On 15 December 2020, the Brazil Ministry of Health reported the second confirmed human infection with influenza A(H1N2) variant virus [A(H1N2)v] in Brazil in 2020. The case was a 4 year-old female who lives on a farm which also functions as a swine slaughter in Irati municipality, Paraná state. On 16 November 2020, the case had illness onset with a fever, cough, coryza, headache and dyspnea, and was provided ambulatory care on the same day at Darcy Vargas Hospital. He was treated with medication for fever and headache and has recovered. No symptomatic contacts were found among the case’s family.On 18 and 19 November, respiratory samples were collected for testing. The Parana State Laboratory detected an unsubtypeable influenza A virus and the samples were sent to the Oswaldo Cruz Institute (Fiocruz), the National Influenza Centre (NIC) in Rio de Janeiro for complete viral genome sequencing, where influenza A(H1N2)v virus was confirmed on 14 December.The A(H1N2)v virus is genetically different from other variant viruses previously detected in humans in Brazil in 2015 and in April 2020, based on preliminary genetic analysis conducted by Fiocruz NIC. The preliminary analysis shows that all genes are most similar to those from currently circulating influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses, except for neuraminidase which is most similar to those from influenza A(H3N2) viruses. Further characterization of the virus is underway. All influenza type A viruses detected by sentinel surveillance and viruses submitted from non-sentinel sites (hospital and peripheral laboratories) in Brazil are subtyped by properties of hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) surface proteins. To date, no other human infections with variant viruses have been reported in Brazil.This case is the third human infection of influenza A(H1N2)v virus reported in Parana state and in Brazil. The first case was detected in 2015 and the second in April 2020. These two confirmed cases lived in rural areas with pig farming and one case worked in a pig slaughterhouse. Local authorities carried out epidemiological and veterinary investigations to obtain more information about possible exposure, potential suspected cases, clinical features and evolution of the case among other epidemiological, virological and clinical information. While investigations are ongoing, local authorities enhanced laboratory surveillance and subtyping of influenza samples in Irati municipality where the case was reported.There has been some limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. The risk assessment will be reviewed if needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.Swine influenza viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on the geographic location, genetic characteristics of these viruses vary. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine (but not people) is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. Most human cases are the result of exposure to swine influenza viruses through contact with infected swine or in some cases, contaminated environments. Further human cases can be expected because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations around the world.Influenza viruses which infect swine may be different from human influenza viruses. Thus, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. In addition, pigs are susceptible to avian, human and swine influenza viruses; they potentially may be infected with influenza viruses from different species at the same time. If this happens, it is possible for the genes of these viruses to mix and create a new virus. This type of major change in the influenza A viruses is known as antigenic shift. If this new virus causes illness in people and can be transmitted easily from person-to-person, an influenza pandemic can occur.Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human or animal health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations [IHR (2005)] and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of seasonal influenza.WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.In case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted, even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results. Epidemiologic investigations should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal human-to-human transmission. Clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for influenza for further characterization.  From October to December 2020, a total of seven confirmed cases of yellow fever (YF) have been reported from four health districts in three regions in Senegal. The outbreak consists of a cluster of four confirmed cases from three health zones in Kidira health district, Tambacounda region; one case in the neighbouring Kedougou health district, Kedougou region; one case in Saraya health district, Kedougou region; and one case in Thilogne health district, Matam region.In Tambacounda region, on 18 October 2020, a sample was collected from a 40 year-old female living in Kidira district during an investigation for West Nile virus infection. On 29 October, Institut Pasteur de Dakar (IPD) confirmed the case as yellow fever. On 31 October, IPD reported results of a second confirmed case of YF to national health authorities, following a notification by Bakel health zone, Kidira health district. The case was an 8 year-old boy whose illness began in Kidira health district and died on 31 October. On 12 November, IPD notified national health authorities about a third confirmed case, a 23 year-old male, who was detected by routine surveillance and died on 5 November. On 16 November, a fourth confirmed case, a 15 year-old boy from Kidira health district, was reported to national health authorities. The two deaths among the four cases reported in Kidira health district occurred at two hospitals: one at the Matam regional hospital and the other at the Tambacounda regional hospital.In Kedougou and Matam regions, three confirmed cases were reported in December 2020, whose samples were collected during various investigations. In Kedougou region, laboratory tests conducted by IPD revealed that out of the 16 samples received from region, there were:In Matam region, one case was confirmed as YF by IgM and PRNT. The case is a 90-year-old male from Thilogne health district, who is hospitalized in a private clinic in Dakar.The Strategic Tool for Assessing Risks (STAR), which was used prior to notification of the third case in Kidira health district, classified YF as "low", where small outbreaks can be observed but likely not a large outbreak.   The Ministry of Health is coordinating a rapid response. Recommended response activities include immunization of the local population, enhanced surveillance, risk communication, community engagement and vector control. Additional potential support for vaccines and operational costs may be requested by the country.The detection of YF cases in the Tambacounda and Kedougou regions demonstrates the possibility of sylvatic spread of YF to unvaccinated people in a rural area and emphasizes the importance of maintaining high population immunity in all countries located in areas at high risk for YF. Recent epidemiological studies have reported that the villages are in a savanna area with non-human primates. Permanent or temporary pools of water are observed at the outskirts of residential areas.Although mass vaccination took place in Senegal in 2007, the eastern part of the country is considered to be at high risk of endemic YF transmission. Unvaccinated individuals remain vulnerable to infection with YF due to the persistence of the disease in primates (sylvatic cycle), especially in rural areas. The two affected regions are also difficult to reach, making vaccination efforts challenging. Intensive care units in the regions are far from the district (186 km) with poor road conditions. Affected districts are rural, largely consisted of forests, making it difficult to control the vector and mitigate the combined sylvatic-urban cycle.The COVID-19 pandemic poses a risk of disruption to routine immunization activities due to the burden on health systems and declining immunization uptake due to physical distancing or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services, even for brief periods, will increase the number of susceptible individuals and increase the likelihood of outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases. As of 27 December 2020, there were 18 523 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 387 deaths reported in Senegal. YF is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes and has the potential to spread rapidly and have serious public health consequences. There is no specific treatment, although the disease can be prevented with a single dose of YF vaccine, which confers lifelong immunity. Supportive care to treat dehydration, respiratory failure and fever, and antibiotic treatment for associated bacterial infections are recommended.Senegal is considered a high priority country by the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) strategy. The introduction of YF vaccination into routine vaccination took place in January 2005. Vaccination is the primary means of preventing and controlling YF. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also useful to stop transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities in implementing these interventions to control the current epidemic.WHO recommends YF vaccination for all international travelers aged 9-months or older traveling to Senegal. Senegal also requires a YF vaccination certificate for travelers aged 9-months or older from countries at risk of YF transmission and travelers who have transited more than 12 hours at an airport of a country that is at risk of transmitting YF.YF vaccination is safe, highly effective and offers protection for life. In accordance with the International Health Regulaions (2005), third edition, the validity of the international YF vaccination certificate extends to the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of YF vaccine cannot be required from international travelers as a condition of entry.WHO has published guidelines for vaccination activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and is currently developing specific operational guidelines for conducting mass vaccination campaigns in the context of COVID-19. Where conditions permit, the EYE strategy will support the rapid resumption of YF prevention activities.WHO encourages Member States to take all necessary measures to keep travelers well informed of risks and preventive measures, including vaccination. Travelers should also be aware of the signs and symptoms of YF and should consult a physician promptly when showing signs. Returning viremic travelers may pose a risk to the establishment of local YF transmission cycles in areas where the competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Senegal based on the information available on this outbreak.  The Koundara Health District, where 50 of the 52 cases (96%) were reported, has 7 health areas including an urban commune (Koundara Center). The geographic distribution of the notifications are as follows:Of the 50 suspected YF cases from Koundara 34 (68%) were male. For cases in Koundara, the most affected age group is 5-14 years with 27 cases (59%), followed by 1-4 years with 14 cases (30%) and the age group ≥ 15 years with 5 cases (11%). Out of 14 registered deaths, 9 occurred at a hospital and 5 in the community. Among the 14 deaths, 4 samples were taken; all of which were negative for YF.The yellow fever vaccination status for the 50 notified cases within Koundara from 06 November to 09 December is as follows: vaccinated (without card) 1 case (2%); unvaccinated: 31 cases (62%); and status unknown: 18 cases (36%).Following the notification of the first three confirmed IgM positive cases, 2 912 children (9-59m) were vaccinated against yellow fever.Guinea is a high risk endemic country according to the EYE (Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics) global strategy classification. The country thus implements routine vaccination for children from 9 months of age, international travelers and organizes preventive and response campaigns according to the epidemiological context. According to WHO-UNICEF estimates, the vaccination coverage against yellow fever in Guinea has been 40% for the years 2016 to 2019, beneath the level necessary to sustain population immunity. A survey of yellow fever vaccination carried out in the community in Koundara district found that coverage is very low (16%). This low coverage suggests that a high proportion of the population is at risk, particularly children born after the 2005 mass vaccination campaign in Boke and any older person who was missed in past vaccination campaigns. The last tranche of preventive mass vaccination campaigns in Guinea was completed in 2010.An entomological survey was carried out to identify and investigate the likely points of contact between Aedes mosquitoes and humans. The capture of nymphs or larvae in backwaters, water supply points, households and surrounding stagnant water in the localities of Sareboilo, Guingan, Kamaby and Urban Commune revealed mosquitoes of the genus Aedes, with the possibility of direct contact with the local population. In addition, in the prefecture of Koundara, there are factors conducive to sylvatic spillover of YF virus into human populations, including the presence of many non-human primates (NHPs) and the natural and animal parks (Niékolobadjar Park and the classified forest of N’Dama where NHPs are found).The Koundara Health District Public Health Emergency Operation Center set up a response coordinated by the Ministry of Health. Response activities implemented include in-depth investigations around suspected YF cases, active case finding, initial reactive vaccination around suspected YF cases, clinical management, vector control, risk communication and community engagement, transport and analysis of samples to the laboratory in Conakry and the Institut Pasteur in Dakar, communication within the framework of the IHR, and the development of an ongoing response plan.WHO and its partners will continue to support local authorities in implementing targeted vector control measures in urban centres to interrupt transmission to control the current epidemic. Eight IgM positive cases were reported from four prefectures of Koundara district. Subsequent analysis by the regional reference laboratory IPD has confirmed yellow fever. The district is noted to have risk factors for a spread of the yellow fever virus, including documented Aedes species, parks inhabited by monkeys, forests extending to neighboring countries (Senegal, Guinea Bissau) and suboptimal YF vaccination coverage. The occurrence of suspected YF cases in urban and peri-urban areas with largely unvaccinated populations increases the risk of epidemic amplification.The risk at the national level is considered high because of the large number of cases with an unusual age profile of young children in a short period of time, with a focus in Koundara. The risk at the regional level is considered moderate given the geographic location of the suspected YF cases and potential population movements. Yellow fever is an acute viral hemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes and has the potential to spread rapidly and have serious public health consequences. There is no specific treatment, although the disease can be prevented with a single dose of yellow fever vaccine, which provides lifelong immunity. Supportive care to treat dehydration, respiratory failure and fever, and antibiotic treatment for associated bacterial infections are recommended. Vaccination is the most important way to prevent infection.Guinea is one of a group of 27 high risk endemic countries according to the EYE (Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics Global Strategy) classification. The reactive mass vaccination campaigns, organized as a matter of urgency to protect populations during the 2002 YF epidemic, helped limit the impact of the epidemic. Guinea conducted phased preventive vaccination campaigns against yellow fever in 2005 and 2010 , with a 95% vaccination coverage. Vaccination is the main way to prevent and control yellow fever. The unusual age profile of the current cluster of suspected YF cases highlights both the importance of maintaining strong YF vaccination coverage through routine immunization, and also the importance of ruling out other causes of acute febrile jaundice through differential diagnosis.Vaccination against yellow fever is safe, highly effective and provides lifelong protection. According to IHR (2005), the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends for the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travelers as a condition of entry.WHO has published guidelines for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemic (https://www.who.int/publications-detail-redirect/WHO-2019-nCoV-Framework_Mass_Vaccination-2020.1) and is currently developing specific operational guidelines for conducting mass immunization campaigns in the context of COVID-19. The EYE strategy encourages immunization of all eligible children in through routine immunization.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travelers aged 9 months and over, to Guinea. Guinea also requires a certificate of vaccination against yellow fever for travelers aged 9 months and over coming from countries at risk of yellow fever transmission, and for travelers who have passed through the airport for more than 12 hours.WHO encourages Member States to take all necessary measures to keep travelers well informed about YF risks and preventive measures, including vaccination. Travelers should also be made aware of the symptoms and signs of yellow fever and be advised to seek medical attention promptly when they show signs. Returning viraemic travelers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the vector is present.The updated areas at risk for yellow fever transmission and related recommendations for vaccination of international travelers were updated by WHO on July 1, 2020; the revised risk area map and yellow fever vaccination recommendations are available on the WHO International Travel and Health website. WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade in Guinea based on the information available on this outbreak.  On 14 December 2020, authorities of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland reported to WHO that a new SARS-CoV-2 variant was identified through viral genomic sequencing. This variant is referred to as SARS-CoV-2 VUI 202012/01 (Variant Under Investigation, year 2020, month 12, variant 01). Initial analysis indicates that the variant may spread more readily between people. Investigations are ongoing to determine if this variant is associated with any changes in the severity of symptoms, antibody response or vaccine efficacy.A total of 1108 cases infected with SARS-CoV-2 VUI 202012/01 have been detected in the United Kingdom as of 13 December 2020. The variant was picked up as part of an epidemiological and virological investigation initiated earlier in December 2020 following an unexpected rise in COVID-19 cases in South East England. It was characterized by a more than three-fold increase in the 14-day case notification rate from epidemiological week 41 to week 50 (5 October to 13 December 2020). On average, between 5 - 10% of all SARS-CoV-2 viruses have routinely been sequenced in the United Kingdom and 4% routinely sequenced in South East England since the beginning of the pandemic. From 5 October to 13 December, over 50% of isolates were identified as the variant strain in South East England. Retrospective analysis traced the first identified variant to Kent, South East England, on 20 September 2020, which was followed by a rapid increase of the same variant identified later in November. Most COVID-19 cases from whom this variant has been identified have occurred in people under 60 years of age.The variant is defined by the presence of a range of 14 mutations resulting in amino acid changes and three deletions. Some of these mutations may influence the transmissibility of the virus in humans:The new VUI-202012/01 variant has been identified in several countries including Australia, Denmark, Italy, Iceland and the Netherlands.Preliminary reports by the United Kingdom are that this variant is more transmissible than previous circulating viruses, with an estimated increase of between 40% and 70% in transmissibility (adding 0.4 to the basic reproduction number R0, bringing it to a range of 1.5 to 1.7). Laboratory studies are ongoing to determine whether these variant viruses have different biological properties or alter vaccine efficacy. There is not enough information at present to determine if this variant is associated with any change in severity of clinical disease, antibody response or vaccine efficacy. The authorities in the United Kingdom are conducting epidemiological and virological investigations to further assess the transmissibility, infection-severity, risk of reinfection and antibody response of this new variant. As one of the mutations (N501Y) is in the receptor binding domain, the authorities are urgently investigating the neutralization activity of sera from recovered and vaccinated patients against this variant to determine if there is any impact on vaccine performance.Genomic data of this variant has been uploaded to GISAID by the authorities of the United Kingdom and genomic surveillance of the virus continues across the country to monitor the situation.On 19 December 2020, authorities in the United Kingdom announced that affected areas would be subject to Tier 4 restrictions including reduced social gatherings, tighter movement restrictions, requests to work from home wherever possible, and closures of non-essential businesses. All viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, change over time, but most of these mutations or changes do not have a direct benefit to the virus or may even be detrimental to its propagation. Further laboratory investigations are required to more fully understand the impact of specific mutation on viral properties and the effectiveness of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines. These investigations are complex and require time and collaboration amongst different research groups.The sharing of full genome sequences is facilitating detailed analyses by partners. The WHO SARS-CoV-2 Virus Evolution Working Group is working with colleagues from the United Kingdom to better understand the available results and support further studies.Further epidemiological and laboratory-based studies are rapidly required to understand the implications of these viruses in terms of available SARS-CoV-2 clinical presentation, diagnosis, treatment and vaccine development. The preliminary findings by the United Kingdom signal the broader issue of SARS-CoV-2 virus mutations, and WHO underscores the importance of prompt sharing of epidemiological, virological and full genome sequence information with other countries and research teams, including through open-source platforms such as GISAID and others.WHO advises that further epidemiological and virological studies be conducted to understand the specific mutations described by the United Kingdom and other countries to further investigate any changes in the function of the virus in terms of infectivity and pathogenicity. WHO advises all countries to increase the routine sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 viruses where possible, and sharing of sequence data internationally, in particular, to report if the same mutations of concern are found.WHO would like to draw attention to the concern about the reported loss of performance of PCR assays that target the spike (S) gene of the virus. Laboratories using commercial PCR kits for which the targeted viral genes are not clearly identified in the manufacturer’s instructions are advised to contact the manufacturer for more information. Laboratories using in-house PCR assays that target the S gene of the virus should also be aware of this potential issue. In order to limit the impact on the detection capacities in the countries, an approach using different assays in parallel or multiplex assays targeting different viral genes is also recommended to allow the detection of potential arising variants.All countries need to assess their level of local transmission and apply appropriate prevention and control activities including adapting public health and social measures as per WHO guidance.It is important to remind communities and health workers of the basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections:WHO recommends the health measures as listed above for all travelers, including to and from the United Kingdom. In case of symptoms suggestive of acute respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their health care provider. Health authorities should work with travel, transport, and tourism sectors to provide travelers with information to reduce the general risk of acute respiratory infections, via travel health clinics, travel agencies, conveyance operators, and at points of entry.In line with the advice provided by the Emergency Committee on COVID-19 at its most recent meeting, WHO recommends that States Parties should regularly re-consider measures applied to international travel in compliance with Article 43 of the IHR (2005) and continue to provide information and rationale to WHO on measures that significantly interfere with international traffic. Countries should also ensure that measures affecting international traffic are risk-based, evidence-based, coherent, proportionate and time limited.WHO has recently published an interim guidance – "Considerations for implementing a risk-based approach to international travel in the context of COVID-19", to provide countries with a risk based approach to decision-making process for calibrating travel related risk mitigation measures in the context of international travel, aiming at reducing travel-associated exportation, importation and onward transmission of SARS-CoV-2 while avoiding unnecessary interference with international traffic.WHO recommends that countries take a risk-based approach. National authorities are encouraged to publish their risk assessment methodology and the list of departure countries to which restrictions apply; and these should be updated regularly. In all circumstances, essential travel (e.g., emergency responders; providers of public health technical support; critical personnel in transport and security sector such as seafarers; repatriations; and cargo transport for essential supplies such as food, medicines, and fuel) identified by countries should always be prioritized and facilitated.Since June 2020, Danish authorities have reported an extensive spread of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, on mink farms in Denmark. On 5 November, the Danish public health authorities reported the detection of a mink-associated SARS-CoV-2 variant with a combination of mutations not previously observed (referred to as “Cluster 5”) in 12 human cases in North Jutland, detected from August to September 2020.To date, Statens Serum Institut (SSI) in Denmark has identified seven unique mutations in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 among variants co-circulating in mink and humans. SSI cultured the “Cluster 5” variant with four amino acid changes in the spike protein, which was identified in mink and isolated from the 12 human cases reported in North Jutland. Preliminary findings suggested that there was a lower capability of antibodies to neutralize the Cluster 5 strain, which requires further investigation.Following public health measures implemented by Danish authorities, the incidence of COVID-19 in North Jutland decreased from 100 per 100,000 population in the week beginning 2 November (week 45) to 60 per 100,000 population in the week beginning 16 November (week 47). Over the past weeks, Danish authorities have conducted mass testing of 111 447 individuals in North Jutland using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and are planning to conduct genetic sequencing for all positive samples.In November 2020, 349 cases were reported among people associated with mink farming, an increase from 200 cases in October 2020. Since June 2020, a total of 644 people associated with mink farming have tested positive. Furthermore, there have been at least 338 cases reported among people working with mink pelting, in six factories and two small facilities, which suggests that there is an increased risk of COVID-19 infection in people who are involved in farming, culling and pelting of mink. As of 1 December 2020, a total of 289 mink farms have been affected, which accounts for approximately 20% of all mink farms in Denmark.From the week beginning 6 June 2020 (week 24) to the week beginning 16 November 2020 (week 47), 10 386 COVID-19 positive samples from unique individuals underwent whole genome sequencing, which accounted for 17.6% of all positive samples in the corresponding time period. Of these sequenced samples, 750 were virus variants associated with infected mink. In addition, at least two new SARS-CoV-2 variants were recently detected in Southern Denmark which were not genetically related to the original Danish mink-associated variant strain.In North Denmark, the proportion of SARS-CoV-2 mink-associated variant strains among all sequenced samples decreased from 60% and 51% in weeks 41 and 42, respectively, to 26% and 31% in weeks 46 and 47; in Central Denmark, the proportion increased from ~3% in weeks 41 and 42 to over 30% in weeks 46 and 47; in South Denmark, the proportion increased from 0% in weeks 41 and 42 to 11% and 21% in weeks 46 and 47, respectively, while noting that there are differences in sequencing frequency and practices among various regions. In areas with no affected mink farms, human cases infected with the mink-associated variant have occurred sporadically. As of 20 November, no new human cases of the Cluster 5 strain have been detected by genetic sequencing, and authorities assessed that the Cluster 5 variant is no longer circulating in humans.Mink have previously been reported to be infected with SARS-CoV-2, including in two outbreaks on large mink farms in the Netherlands in April 2020. Additionally, the Netherlands have reported human infections with mink-associated SARS-CoV-2 strains which were not Cluster 5 strains. To date, eight countries, namely Denmark, Lithuania, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Italy, and Greece and the United States of America have reported COVID-19 in farmed mink to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE).On 4 November 2020, Denmark decided to cull all farmed mink in Denmark. This decision was made following information that it had not been possible to prevent the spread of infection from farm to farm, or from animals to humans, and mink are acting as a reservoir and contributing to the ongoing transmission in Denmark. On 5 November, movement restrictions were introduced in the affected areas in North Jutland. On 6 November, Denmark shared the full genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 obtained from humans to the Global Initiative on Sharing Avian Influenza Data (GISAID) platform, and 133 sequences from mink on 18 November. On 19 November 2020, restrictions were lifted in North Jutland due to decreased incidence and the absence of new cases of the Cluster 5 variant identified in the affected areas.By 25 November, mink on all 289 affected mink farms, and farms within an assigned zone, were culled. Additionally, mink farming has been banned in Denmark until 31 December 2021, including import and export of live mink. Economic support packages have been established for those affected.Danish authorities have continued to work with the WHO SARS-CoV-2 Virus Evolution Working Group and have agreed to share the Cluster 5 variant SARS-CoV-2 with the COVID-19 Reference Laboratory Network for further studies and testing.It is expected that all viruses, including SARS-CoV-2 change over time. SARS-CoV-2 strains which are infecting mink and subsequently transmitted back to humans, may have acquired unique mutations to adapt to the mink host. Advanced laboratory studies are required to fully understand the impact of novel variants of SARS-CoV-2 on viral properties such as transmissibility, clinical presentation and effectiveness of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines. These studies are long, complex and are done in close collaboration with various research groups.While public health and social measures implemented by Denmark have led to positive developments, recent findings of other mink-associated variants among human cases in mid-Jutland and the detection of some 200 human cases among workers are of concern.This event highlights the important role that farmed mink populations can play in the on-going transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and the critical importance of robust surveillance, sampling and sequencing of these viruses by employing a One Health approach, especially around areas where such animal reservoirs are identified. The global relevance of the preliminary findings by Denmark is potentially significant, and WHO recognizes the importance of prompt sharing of epidemiological, virological, and full genome sequence information with other countries and research teams, including through open-source platforms such as GISAID.WHO advises the following measures:WHO recommends the health measures listed above for all travelers. In case of symptoms suggestive of acute respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their health care provider. Health authorities should work with travel, transport and tourism sectors to provide travelers with information to reduce the general risk of acute respiratory infections via travel health clinics, travel agencies, conveyance operators and at points of entry.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions for Denmark based on information currently available in relation to this event.Reports of a cluster of deaths from an undiagnosed disease were notified on 1 November 2020 through Event Based Surveillance in two states, Delta and Enugu, located in southern Nigeria. The Delta State health surveillance system had been informed of the outbreak on 30 October 2020, following a cluster of deaths presenting with similar symptoms.  On 2 November 2020, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) reported to WHO a cluster of deaths in Ute Okpu community in Ika North-East local government area (LGA) of Delta State. Additional cases were reported from 4 other wards of Ika North-East (Idumessah, Owa Alero, Owanta, and Umunede). A preliminary report for Delta State on 5 November 2020, notified of 48 suspected cases of yellow fever (YF) with 30 deaths (CFR 62.5%). The most frequent symptoms included 1-week history of fever, vomiting (with or without blood), bleeding, seizures, and unconsciousness. One patient was reported to have cough, sore throat, and hiccups. Of those 48 reported cases, the main occupation was farmers, and males were predominantly affected (75%). The YF vaccination status of most of the suspected cases is unknown. The index case developed symptoms on 24 July 2020 and died on 28 July 2020. Preliminary investigation did not reveal any significant travel history. Two blood samples were collected, along with nasal and throat swabs on 31 October 2020. Laboratory investigations were carried out at the mobile laboratory of Irrua Specialist Teaching Hospital (ISTH) in Delta State. All blood samples tested by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were negative for Lassa fever and the throat swab was negative for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 . Six more blood samples were collected and sent to ISTH, Edo State and all were negative for Lassa fever, while three were positive for YF by PCR. As of 10 November 2020, 65 suspected cases, including 33 deaths, have been reported. Samples were collected from 27 cases and seven have tested positive for yellow fever by PCR.On 4 November 2020, the Enugu State epidemiologist reported a cluster of deaths of unknown cause to NCDC. Investigations by the Rapid Response team for Enugu State on 4 November 2020 reported 10 deaths, with the majority being males aged 4 to 65 years old and with occupations as farmers. The most frequent symptoms included high grade fever, convulsion, and eventually coma, in addition to blood in the urine, mouth bleeding, bleeding in the respiratory tract, blood shot eyes and pain in the flank. The suggestive differential diagnosis was Lassa fever, YF, cerebrospinal meningitis and COVID-19. A total of 13 blood samples were collected and sent to the National Reference Laboratory in Abuja to be tested for viral haemorrhagic fevers. Results received on 10 November 2020 showed 6 PCR positive YF cases in Enugu State.On 8 November 2020, Bauchi State reported 8 samples tested by PCR at the NCDC National Reference Laboratory positive for YF (7/8 from Ganjuwa LGA, 1/8 unknown LGA). Four of these samples were also IgM positive for YF. Detailed case investigations are ongoing, and the line list is currently being updated.On 15 November 2020, 3 PCR positive samples for yellow fever were reported from Ogbadibo LGA in Benue State. These samples were also tested at the NCDC, National Reference Laboratory. Additionally, there has been a PCR positive sample for YF reported from Ohaukwu LGA in Ebonyi State. This LGA has also been the location of a cluster of probable YF cases that were IgM positive at national reference laboratory and had dates of onset July-August 2020. Security challenges in the LGA had hindered full investigation and work-up at the time of initial notification.The outbreak encompasses 5 states in Nigeria: Delta, Enugu, Bauchi, and Benue and Ebonyi (Figure 2).Nigeria is facing concurrent outbreaks of multiple pathogens. Delta State, located in the South-South geo-political zone of the country, is one of the Lassa fever affected states, though not considered one of the YF hot spot states. In 2020, 18 Lassa fever cases have been laboratory confirmed from 140 suspected cases, including 3 fatalities. Enugu state, in the South-East geopolitical zone of the country, shares boundaries with Benue (Ogbadibo LGA) where there are 3 confirmed cases of Lassa fever, and Ebonyi state which is one of the hotspot states for the Lassa fever outbreak. To date, 10 Lassa fever cases have been reported from Enugu state since the start of the year, including 2 fatalities (20% CFR). While Lassa fever cases are reported year-round, the peak period is December to April.The relative proximity of Delta, Enugu, Benue and Ebonyi states with Lagos is an added concern, though population movements (and hence risk of spread) may have been reduced in the COVID-19 context. However, there is a lack of data on this, and the risk of spread should be monitored.COVID-19 response efforts demand an extraordinary amount of time and resources from the country’s health system while lockdowns, travel restrictions and other mitigations to slow the spread have severely disrupted access to core essential health services. National and state authorities are currently focused on the COVID-19 pandemic, limiting the human resources required to conduct investigations and response activities for the YF outbreaks. Recent relaxation of COVID-19 measures will increase population mobility thereby increasing the risk for amplification of yellow fever, especially if introduced into urban centres. Population mobility in urban settings can be particularly challenging in conducting mass vaccination campaigns due to the size and diagnostic challenges of the operation (SAGE 2016). As of 23 November 2020, 66 383 COVID cases, including 1 167 deaths, have been reported in Nigeria.   The current response at central level:The current response for Delta State:The current response for the cases in Enugu State:The current response for the cases in Bauchi State:The current response for the cases in Benue State:Nigeria is considered a high-risk country by the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) strategy. Routine yellow fever vaccination was introduced to Nigeria’s Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI) in 2004 with an estimated coverage of 54% (2019), with lower figures in some sub-groups. Population immunity against yellow fever in many areas around the country remains below herd immunity thresholds: the MICS 2016/2017 indicated that YF vaccination was 39% in children aged 12 to 23 months. To address the risk of outbreaks and increase population immunity, the EYE strategy PMVC component is being implemented in phases. There are over 30 million doses of YF vaccine in the country for PMVCs – with Delta and Bauchi among the states planned for the current phase of activities. Delta state was already scheduled for a PMVC in 2020. One LGA in Delta state and 4 LGAs in Bauchi state had a vaccination campaign in 2019. This YF vaccine supply and associated preparations could serve to meet the needs of outbreak response. The supplies also include resources such as PPE and hand sanitizers for COVID-19 prevention in a mass vaccination campaign. Enugu and Ebonyi are not included in the current planned PMVCs, however there is a possibility that vaccines and associated supplies in the country might help support an immediate response. By 2024, it is anticipated that all the states in Nigeria will have undergone campaign activities to protect at-risk populations against yellow fever. This plan may be further updated or accelerated based on risk, vaccine availability, and implementation feasibility. Nigeria is a high-risk country for yellow fever. The re-emergence of yellow fever in September 2017 in Nigeria has been marked by outbreaks over a wide geographical area. The yellow fever outbreaks reported in Bauchi, Benue and Katsina states from August to November 2019, with spread to multiple other states showed an expansion of YF transmission, and an elevated risk for YF outbreaks to rapidly spread and amplify, impacting areas without prior reported cases since 2017 and in areas with large under immunized populations. In the current year, suspected YF cases have been reported from all 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) and confirmed YF cases across 9 states (Delta, Enugu, Bauchi, Benue, Kogi, Oyo, Edo Kwara and Katsina). These new outbreaks in Bauchi, Delta and Enugu are affecting areas without prior reported cases this year and suggest underlying sustained high viral transmission in the epizootic cycle with spillover to human populations. Due to: the risk of spread to other states with under-immunized populations, including to large urban centers; the high CFR; the potential for ongoing local transmission and amplification due to suboptimal vaccination coverage; and the occurrence of cases in peri-urban areas (e.g. in Delta State) and densely populated LGAs with proximity to Lagos, the risk is high.There is no entomological information currently available for the affected LGAs, however previous entomological surveys conducted in 2018/2019 during outbreaks in settings of similar climate and vegetation in Ebonyi, Bauchi, Edo, Kogi and Kwara identified adult Aedes spp. mosquitos However, the region is entering the dry season (November to March) and vector densities are expected to be lower. The vector, Aedes aegypti is only moderately affected by drier conditions and remains active, and therefore sustained vector-borne transmission within human populations cannot be ruled out.Nigeria is facing several concurrent public health emergencies, including circulating Vaccine Derived Polio Virus (cVDPV), measles, monkeypox, Lassa fever and cholera outbreaks as well as humanitarian crisis in the northeast of the country. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and review the risk assessment based on the latest available information. At present, the Yellow Fever outbreaks are considered high risk at national level, low at regional and global levels. Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes and has the potential to spread rapidly and cause serious public health impact. There is no specific treatment, although the disease is preventable using a single dose of yellow fever vaccine, which provides immunity for life. Supportive care to treat dehydration, respiratory failure and fever and antibiotic treatment for associated bacterial infections can reduce mortality and is recommended.Yellow fever is endemic in Nigeria, a priority country for the EYE strategy. Accelerated phased YF PMVCs are planned to cover the entire country by 2024. Vaccination is the primary intervention for prevention and control of yellow fever. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreak.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers from 9 months of age going to Nigeria. Nigeria requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate for all travellers aged 9 months or over as a condition of entry.Yellow fever vaccines recommended by WHO are safe, highly effective and provide life-long protection against infection. In accordance with the IHR (2005), the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated with a WHO approved vaccine. A booster dose of approved yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO encourages Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures, including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and are instructed to seek rapid medical advice when presenting signs. Viraemic returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.The updated areas at-risk for yellow fever transmission and the related recommendations for vaccination of international travellers were updated by WHO on 1 July 2020 and are available on the WHO International Travel and Health website (see below).WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to Nigeria based on the information available on this outbreak. On 18 November 2020, the Minister of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the end of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak in Equateur Province. The declaration was made in accordance with WHO recommendations, 42 days after the last confirmed case tested negative for the second time on 6 October 2020 in Makanza Health Zone, Equateur Province.This outbreak was declared on 1 June 2020 following investigations and laboratory confirmation of EVD in samples taken after four deaths reported in Mbandaka Health Zone. Further investigations identified cases with dates of symptom onset from May to September 2020 in 41 health areas across 13 health zones, namely Bikoro, Bolenge, Bolomba, Bomongo, Iboko, Ingende, Lilanga Bobangi, Lolanga Mampoko, Lotumbe, Makanza, Mbandaka, Monieka and Wangata Health Zones.This was the 11th EVD outbreak reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the virus was first identified in 1976, and the second in Equateur Province. Two genetically distinct Ebola Zaire viruses were in circulation during this outbreak, based on available information. Four cases that were linked through one chain of transmission in Iboko Health Zone were infected with the same Ebola virus as the 2018 outbreak in Equateur Province, and a new Ebola Zaire virus that had emerged in 2020 was identified in all the other cases.The outbreak response was led by the Ministry of Health with support from WHO and partners. Priorities during this response included strengthening diagnostic capabilities, infection prevention and control in health facilities and communities, ring vaccination around confirmed and probable cases and vaccination of frontline workers, delivering care and monoclonal antibody treatment for patients, supporting safe and dignified burials, risk communication and community engagement and establishment of 52 points of entry or points of control to screen population movements.Response efforts were mounted in the context of significant logistical challenges. For example, cellular coverage for mobile phones was severely constrained and limitations in ground transportation necessitated aerial or riverine transport, which hampered communication among surveillance teams. This complicated the transportation and testing of quality laboratory samples, and delayed deployment of technical experts to affected areas.Disease surveillance was consistently challenged by low levels of reported alerts, particularly among deaths. Overall, 67% of confirmed cases were not identified as known contacts at the time of detection, highlighting the challenges of performing rigorous case investigation and the potential for undetected transmission. Moreover, the geographical distribution and epidemiological links between cases have not yet been well-understood. Despite these challenges, multi-sectoral coordination was strengthened, and surveillance and investigation activities were enhanced. No new confirmed cases have been reported since 28 September 2020.From 1 June to 18 November 2020, a total of 130 EVD cases including 119 confirmed and 11 probable cases were reported from 13 health zones. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 45% (n=58) were female and 23% (n=30) were children aged less than 18 years. There were 55 deaths recorded (overall proportion of deaths among reported cases was 42%), 29% (34/119) of cases died outside Ebola treatment centres, and 75 cases recovered from EVD. Over the course of the outbreak, more than 26 000 contacts of cases were registered in Equateur Province.However, the risk of re-emergence of EVD remains, even after human-to-human transmission of EVD has been interrupted in Equateur Province. Ebola Zaire virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region, and it can persist in some body fluids of survivors for several months, which in rare events may result in secondary transmission. Therefore, cases of EVD may continue to be reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A robust and coordinated surveillance system must be maintained to rapidly detect, isolate, test and provide care for new suspected cases, and operations must continue to care for people who have recovered from EVD.Under the longer-term plan that is currently in development, enhanced surveillance, a programme for long-term care of Ebola survivors and other response mechanisms remain in place after the end of the outbreak. These activities will help maintain heightened vigilance and contribute to strengthening a resilient health care system.In response to this EVD outbreak, from 1 June 2020 to 18 November 2020: On 18 November 2020, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the end of human-to-human transmission of EVD over in Equateur Province after two maximum incubation periods (42 days) had elapsed since the last confirmed case tested negative for the second time on 6 October 2020. However, there remains a risk of re-emergence of EVD because alert rates have remained sub-optimal in all affected and non-affected health zones, including death alerts throughout the outbreak, and cases may have gone undetected. In addition, Ebola virus is enzootic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and it can persist in some body fluids of survivors for several months which, in rare events, may result in secondary transmission.There are ongoing challenges for surveillance, including access to affected areas and community mistrust toward authorities and outbreak responders. Other health emergencies such as coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), cholera and measles outbreaks may jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to re-emergence of EVD cases.WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans:To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys and apes:To reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission from direct or close contact with people with EVD symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids:To reduce the risk of possible transmission from virus persistence in some body fluids of survivors, WHO recommends establishing an EVD survivors care programme to provide medical care, psychological support and biological testing (until two negative consecutive tests). WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has been tested negative for Ebola virus.  The Ministry of Health in Lao People's Democratic Republic (PDR) reported a human case of infection with an avian influenza A(H5N1) virus. The case is a one-year-old female who developed symptoms of fever, productive cough, difficulty breathing and runny nose on 13 October 2020. She was hospitalized for her illness on 16 October and discharged on 19 October. As part of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) sentinel surveillance, a specimen was collected on the date of hospitalization and confirmed to be positive for avian influenza A(H5N1) on 28 October by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Centre for Laboratory and Epidemiology (NCLE).Among the close contacts of the patient, one contact developed fever and cough after the onset of illness in the case. Specimens collected from all household contacts, including the symptomatic contact, were negative for influenza A viruses.Upon further investigation, there were domestic poultry at the residence. There was no travel history of the family 14 days prior to symptom onset in the case.This is the third human case of avian influenza A(H5N1) virus reported from Lao PDR since 2005; two cases including two deaths were reported in 2007. The government of Lao PDR has taken the following monitoring, prevention and control measures as detailed in the Joint National Preparedness and Contingency Plan for Avian influenza A(H7N9) and A(H5N1) for Lao PDR: To date, 862 human cases of influenza A(H5N1) have been reported to WHO since 2003, including three from Lao PDR. Nearly all cases of avian influenza A(H5N1) infection in humans have been associated with close contact with infected live or dead birds, or influenza A(H5N1) virus-contaminated environments. Human infection can cause severe disease and has reportedly high mortality rate. Since the virus continues to be detected in poultry populations, further human cases can be expected.Currently available epidemiologic and virologic evidence suggests that A(H5N1) viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza. Thorough investigation of every human infection with a un-subtypeable influenza A virus is essential. Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virologic, epidemiologic and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health with timely sharing of such viruses and related information for further characterization and risk assessment.All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report .In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiological investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiological investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization.General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and potentially contaminated environments and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travelers.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it recommend that any travel or trade restrictions be applied. The Ministry of Health (MoH) notified WHO that between 13 September and 1 October 2020, eight cases of Rift Valley Fever (RVF) including seven deaths were confirmed in animal breeders. Districts affected include Tidjikja and Moudjéria (Tagant region), Guerou (Assaba region) and Chinguetty (Adrar region). Laboratory confirmation of RVF infection was performed using a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Institute for Public Health Research (INRSP) in Nouakchott. The age of infected patients varied between 16 and 70 years old and included one woman and seven men. All seven deaths occurred among hospitalised patients with fever and haemorrhagic syndrome (petechia, gingivorrhagia) and vomiting.Between 4 September and 7 November 2020, a total of 214 people were sampled and their samples have been sent to the INRSP for laboratory testing with a total of 75 testing positive for RVF (RT-PCR and serology by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Positive cases have been reported in 11 of 15 regions of the country: Brakna, Trarza, Gorgol, (on the border with Senegal), Adrar, Assaba, Hodh El Gharby, Hodh El Chargui, Guidimaka (on the border with Mali) and Nouakchott Sud, Nouakchott Ouest and Tagant. The Tagant region is the most affected (38/75, 51%) with principal hotspot districts being Tidjikja and Moudjeria. Thus far a total of 25 deaths have been reported from this outbreak.Outbreaks in animals have also been confirmed in the regions of Assaba, Tagant, Brakna, Trarza, Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh El Chargui. The results of 557 animal samples taken as of 15 October 2020 showed that 74 camels, 52 small ruminants and 12 cattle were positive for Rift Valley Fever. Since the beginning of the outbreak, WHO has been working closely with the Ministry of Health to respond to the current outbreak and monitor the evolution of the epidemiological situation.WHO is supporting the following public health activities being implemented to respond to the outbreak:Joint field missions by FAO, OIE and WHO experts are planned to support MOH and the Ministry of Rural Development in the prevention and control of RVF outbreaks, in particular with regards to laboratory capacities, surveillance and risk communication to various populations at risk, and in other aspects related to the “One Health” concept. Since the beginning of the outbreak, WHO has been working closely with the Ministry of Health to respond to the current outbreak and monitor the evolution of the epidemiological situation.WHO is supporting the following public health activities being implemented to respond to the outbreak:Joint field missions by FAO, OIE and WHO experts are planned to support MOH and the Ministry of Rural Development in the prevention and control of RVF outbreaks, in particular with regards to laboratory capacities, surveillance and risk communication to various populations at risk, and in other aspects related to the “One Health” concept. Rift Valley Fever is an environmentally-driven mosquito-borne zoonosis that primarily affects domestic animals (including cattle, sheep, camels and goats). Human cases often occur in proximity to outbreaks in livestock in an environment favourable for mosquito vectors to transmit the virus locally. Most human infections result from direct or indirect contact with the blood or organs of infected animals. Care must be taken when handling sick animals or human patients, their products and laboratory samples. Raising awareness of the risk factors of RVF infection as well as other protective measures such as vector control and protection against mosquito bites is the key to reduce human infection and deaths. Public health messages for risk reduction should focus on:As outbreaks of RVF in animals precede human cases, the establishment of an active animal health surveillance system is essential in providing early warning for animal and public health authorities. Routine animal immunization in endemic areas can prevent RVF epizootics. Vaccination campaigns are not recommended during an outbreak as it may intensify transmission among the herd through needle propagation of the virus. Therefore, public education, livestock quarantine, and slaughter bans are perhaps the most effective measures against disease spread during the pre-outbreak and outbreak phasesWHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Mauritania or the affected area based on the current information available on this event.  On 13 October 2020, the French health authorities officially reported 13 laboratory-confirmed cases of Mayaro fever in French Guiana, France.In September 2020, the Institut Pasteur de la Guyane (IPG) (member of the French National Reference Laboratory for arboviruses) identified two cases of Mayaro virus infection (MAYV) confirmed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and one probable case found positive for Mayaro antibodies. The case-patients presented dengue-like symptoms and joint pains, and tested negative for dengue by RT-PCR.This unexpected diagnosis led to a further retrospective search for additional cases of Mayaro fever among patients with dengue-like symptoms who tested negative for dengue. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was performed on samples collected between 15 July and 15 September, at laboratories mainly located in Cayenne area. These blood samples were collected from patients with dengue-like symptoms , who had tested negative for dengue within five days after the onset of symptoms. In total (including the first detections and retrospective search) IPG identified 11 cases of Mayaro fever by RT-PCR out of 79 samples tested. These cases were reported on 21 September 2020.On 2 October and 8 October 2020, two additional confirmed cases of Mayaro fever were reported by the Institute Pasteur de la Guyane in Cayenne, leading to a total of 13 confirmed cases among 97 tested samples between 15 July and early October. The onset of symptoms for the 13 confirmed cases ranged from 18 July to 29 September 2020. Of the 13 confirmed cases, 11 lived in the urban coastal area including nine from Cayenne area (Cayenne: 1, Rémire: 4, Matoury: 4), one from Kourou, and one from Montsinery-Tonnegrande. Only two cases lived in a rural/sylvatic area, both in Roura (including one in the village of Cacao, located further in the interior). The age of these cases ranged between 11 to 68 years old (median = 40 years old) and the male to female sex ratio was 1.2:1.Mayaro virus (MAYV) has been known to circulate in French Guiana since 1998, but the number of RT-PCR detections of MAYV by IPG between 2017 and 2019 added up to between 1 to 3 confirmed cases annually, detected from 150 to over 600 samples tested every year. As per the testing criteria for MAYV, blood samples were collected within 5 days of the onset of dengue-like symptoms and found negative for dengue virus.Detection of 13 confirmed cases within less than 3 months is thus unusual. Furthermore, MAYV is mainly transmitted through a sylvatic cycle and transmission in urban settings has been sparsely described. It is therefore atypical that 11 out of 13 (85%) identified cases of Mayaro fever resided in an urban area.MAYV vector (Haemagogus species mosquitoes) is also the vector of the sylvatic cycle of yellow fever virus and is present in wild or rural habitats of the region of the Americas and the Caribbean. MAYV has been isolated from other genera of mosquitoes, including Culex,Mansonia, Aedes, Psorophora, and Sabethes.Epidemiological investigation is ongoing in particular to document the travel history of the cases and to determine whether the infections were contracted in forest areas or if the transmission through an urban cycle may be suspected. Public health measures that are planned or ongoing include the following: MAYV was isolated for the first time in Trinidad and Tobago in 1954. However, a retrospective study showed evidence of infection by MAYV in sera collected during the construction of channels in Panama and Colombia between 1904 and 1914. Since then, cases have been reported in Central America and South America, particularly in the regions around the Amazon basin with some cases exported by travelers reported in the academic literature. These cases impacted individuals from Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and unidentified parts of North America.Although some studies suggest MAYV transmission in urban areas, most of the outbreaks described in the last decade in the Americas were reported among residents of rural communities in the Amazon region of Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, and Venezuela. Most human cases occurred among persons who work or reside in tropical rainforests. The reservoir for MAYV is unknown, but some studies have reported virus isolation or high levels of antibodies in host vertebrates, such as non-human primates.Changes in the natural environment, deforestation, urbanization, and mining result in increased interactions between host and vector populations and demonstrates the potential of MAYV to emerge in new areas and re-emerge in existing areas.Mayaro fever is a mosquito borne zoonosis caused by Mayaro virus (MAYV), an arbovirus of the Alphavirus genus, Togavirus family. MAYV transmission is mainly maintained through the sylvatic cycle that involves non-human primates and Haemagogus mosquitoes. Human cases are associated with recent exposures to humid forest environments inhabited by these vectors.At the initial stage, Mayaro fever presents as a non-specific clinical picture like other arboviral diseases (dengue, chikungunya, Zika). The incubation period ranges between 1 to 12 days. The disease is self-limiting, with a duration from 3 to 5 days, with persistence of arthralgia that can remain for weeks or months; however as with others Alphavirus infections, MAYV can produce severe complications, such as intermittent fever, neurological complications, myocarditis, and even death.Due to the generic nature of the symptoms of arboviruses, misdiagnosis can occur. Cases of MAYV may be going undetected due to a lack of awareness among the medical community.Diagnostic testing for MAYV is not widely available, and little is known of MAYV outside of endemic areas. Imported cases may be getting clinically misdiagnosed as dengue, Zika, Chikungunya. In endemic regions coinfection with other arboviral diseases may also misguide the diagnosis of MAYV.The risk of international spread appears to be small at this stage but cannot be excluded if an urban transmission cycle is shown to have been established.In the urban coastal area around Cayenne, there is a risk of additional cases if the transmission occurred in the peri-urban forest. The most likely places of infection are still under investigation.The risk of spread at national level cannot be excluded as the virus circulates over a larger area, beyond Cayenne and its surroundings. Investigations are currently ongoing to determine the affected areas.With the global circulation of the current COVID-19 pandemic, there is a risk of disruption to healthcare access due to both COVID-19 related burden on the health system and healthcare workers, and decreased demand because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Another aspect to be taken into consideration in the light of the current COVID-19 pandemic is the capacity of the local laboratories and national reference laboratories to process samples due the over-demand in processing COVID-19 samples, in addition to the ongoing epidemic of dengue and localized outbreak of Oropouche virus (for more information, please see the DON published on 13 October). Furthermore, due to non-availability of commercial diagnostic kits, Mayaro diagnostic capacity solely rests on the national reference laboratory. As of 18 October 2020, French Guiana has reported 10 268 COVID-19 cases and 69 deaths. Given the broad distribution of the main vector implicated in transmission in the rural areas of the Region and in light of the recent detection of Mayaro fever cases in new geographic areas, WHO encourages Member States to implement actions for detecting cases and keeping healthcare professionals informed to therefore consider Mayaro fever as part of the differential diagnosis for other arboviruses such as chikungunya, dengue, Oropouche, yellow fever and Zika. Considering the similar clinical presentation for Mayaro fever with that of other arboviruses, such as dengue, chikungunya, Oropouche, yellow fever, and zika, surveillance for Mayaro fever could be integrated with existing arbovirus surveillance.Surveillance, diagnosis of MAYV, and vector control are the three main pillars in terms of prevention of the disease. The prevention of Mayaro is contingent on the suppression of mosquito bites and, consequently, of human–vector contact. In the case of Haemagogus and Aedes vectors, whose peak activity coincides at the beginning or the end of the day, personal protection measures should be encouraged and promoted. The suppression of mosquito breeding sites through source reduction can be reinforced by community engagement and social mobilization.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade for French Guiana based on available information on this event.  On 30 September 2020, the French Guiana Regional Health Agency (ARS) reported the first detection of Oropouche virus (OROV) in French Guiana. On 22 September 2020 the Pasteur Institute in Cayenne (a member of the French National Reference Laboratory for arboviruses) notified the France IHR National Focal Point of seven laboratory-confirmed cases of Oropouche virus infection in the village of Saül. These cases were identified following clinical investigations of an unusually high number of dengue-like illnesses in the village. Between 11 August and 25 September, there were 37 clinically-compatible cases of Oropouche virus disease identified in Saül. The results of serology for dengue, chikungunya, and Zika were negative, and seven of nine cases tested positive for OROV by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).Among the 37 clinically-compatible cases, most cases are male (60%) and the median age is 36 years (range 3-82 years). The most represented age range is 15 to 54-years-old (19 cases) followed by 0 to 14-years-old (10 cases). A peak of cases was observed in mid-September however, the outbreak investigation remains ongoing.The village of Saül is remote and is surrounded by Amazonian rainforest. The village can only be reached via the Saül Airport and is approximately a 45-minute flight from Cayenne.It is a popular destination for hiking and the official population of Saül is 150 persons. However, due to a drastic reduction in the frequency of flights to and from Saül during the COVID-19 pandemic, the population living in Saül during August-September was estimated to be between 50 to 80 persons. Therefore, given the 37 clinically compatible cases, the attack rate of OROV, in this village could be as high as 70%. No cases of COVID-19 have been reported in Saül thus far. Public health measures that are planned or are ongoing include the following: This is the first detection of Oropouche virus in French Guiana. Therefore, the population is highly susceptible. To date, there is no evidence of direct human-to-human Oropouche virus transmission. Cases of infection with Oropouche virus have been reported in other countries within the Region of the Americas, and therefore the competent vector, the Culicoides paraensis midge is present in the region, as is Culex quinquefasciatus which can also be a vector. However, the extent to which these vectors are present in French Guiana needs to be further established. Given the geographical distribution of the other competent vectors in the Region of the Americas, cases may be identified in other countries. The WHO Regional Office for the Americas and the Pan-American Health Organization continue to monitor the epidemiological situation based on the latest available information.With the current COVID-19 pandemic, there is a risk of disruption to health care access due to both COVID-19 related burden on the health system and health care workers and decreased demand because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance.Another aspect to consider given the current COVID-19 pandemic, is the capacity of the local laboratories and national reference laboratories to process samples for arboviruses due the over demand in processing COVID-19 samples and the absence of commercial diagnostic kits. As of 12 October, French Guiana reports 10 144 cases of COVID-19 and 69 deaths. Given its clinical presentation, Oropouche fever should be included in the clinical differential diagnosis for other common vector-borne diseases in the region of the Americas (e.g., malaria, dengue, chikungunya, Zika, yellow fever). WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever at least 10 days prior to the travel for all international travelers nine months of age going to French Guiana. French Guiana requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate for travelers over one (1) year of age.The proximity of midge vector breeding to human habitation is a significant risk factor for OROV infection. Prevention strategies are based on control or eradication measures for the arthropod vectors and personal protection measures. Vector control measures rely on reducing midge populations through the eradication of breeding sites, including good agricultural practices. This can be achieved by reducing the number of natural and artificial water-filled habitats that support midge larvae, reducing the adult midge populations around at-risk communities. Personal protection measures rely on prevention of midge biting using mechanical barriers (mosquito nets), insect repellant devices, repellent-treated clothing and anti-mosquito repellents. Chemical insecticides such as deltamethrin and N,N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide (DEET) have demonstrated to be effective in controlling Culicoides and Culex species.Oropouche fever is caused by the Oropouche virus (OROV), a single-stranded RNA virus that is part of the Peribunyaviridae family, that has been found to circulate in Central and South America and the Caribbean. It is suspected that viral circulation includes both epidemic and sylvatic cycles. In the sylvatic cycle, primates, sloths, and perhaps birds are the vertebrate hosts, although a definitive arthropod vector has not been identified. In the epidemic cycle, humans are the amplifying host and OROV is transmitted primarily through the bite of the Culicoides paraensis midge. No direct transmission of the virus from human-to-human has been documented. Oropouche fever causes dengue-like symptoms, with an incubation period of 4-8 days (range: 3-12 days). Symptoms include the sudden onset of high fever, headache, myalgia, rash, joint pain, and vomiting. Illness typically lasts 3–6 days. A brief recurrence of symptoms may occur in up to 60% of cases. Aseptic meningitis is an uncommon complication. In the Americas, outbreaks of OROV have been reported in rural and urban communities of Brazil, Ecuador, Panama, Peru, and Trinidad and Tobago, and now in French Guiana. From 1 January through 13 September 2020, a total of 4,594 suspected cases of monkeypox, including 171 deaths (case fatality ratio 3.7%), have been reported in 127 health zones from 17 out of 26 provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The first epidemic peak was observed at the beginning of March 2020 (epi week 10), with 136 cases reported weekly (Figure1). From 1 January through 7 August, the Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale (INRB) received 80 samples from suspected cases of monkeypox, of which 39 samples were confirmed positive by polymerase chain reaction. Four out of the 80 specimens were skin lesions (crusts/vesicles), the remaining samples were blood. There is no further information at this time regarding the outcome of these 80 patients whose samples were tested. Confirmatory testing remains ongoing.During the same period in 2019, 3,794 suspected cases and 73 deaths (CFR 1.9%) were reported in 120 health zones from 16 provinces while a total of 2,850 suspected cases (CFR 2.1%) were reported in 2018. The provinces reporting the highest number of suspected cases include Sankuru with 973 (21.2%) suspected cases, Mai-Ndombe with 964 (21%) suspected cases, Equateur with 586 (12.8%) suspected cases, Tshuapa with 520 (11.3%) suspected cases and Mongala with 518 (11.3%) suspected cases (Figure 2). From 1 January to 13 September, Kwilu province is reporting the highest case fatality ratio of 16.7% (1 death/6 suspected cases), followed by Tshopo 8.1% (17 deaths/211 suspected cases), and Mai-Ndombe 7.8% (75 deaths/964 suspected cases).Active outbreaks in Mai-Ndombe province (located south of Equateur province, in the north west side of the country) have been reported since January 2020. The outbreak in Inongo health zone (Mai-Ndombe province) is one of the most concerning outbreaks where one-fourth of its territory is affected. This outbreak has been ongoing since June 2020, comprising 65% of the total number of suspected cases with an estimated case fatality ratio of 10%. Moreover, Inongo health zone borders Bikoro health zone (Equateur province); Equateur province is the location of the current Ebola outbreak, and now also a monkeypox outbreak.Within the Democratic Republic of the Congo, majority of suspected cases (58%) are above the age of five; however, the case fatality ratio for children under the age of five is higher at 4.2% (80 deaths/1,907 suspected cases) as compared to 3.4% in cases over the age of five (91 deaths/2,687 suspected cases).Source: Integrated Disease Surveillance (IDS) Report for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Epidemiological Week 37, 2020Monkeypox cases were reported in health zones which are also experiencing multiple disease outbreaks, including measles, polio due to cVDPV, malaria, cholera, and COVID-19, in addition to an ongoing Ebola virus disease outbreak in Equateur Province which continues to experience armed conflict and violence. The security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains unstable, further disrupting surveillance efforts and response activities. Affected regions for this outbreak continue to experience armed conflict and population displacements.Potential exposure might be linked to proximity to the forest with many possible animal reservoirs, including for hunting activities.With global circulation of the virus causing COVID-19 and ongoing insecurity in the region, there is a risk of disruption of access to health care due to the COVID-19 related burden on the health system. As of 16 September 2020, a total of 10,401 cases of COVID-19 including 267 deaths were reported in the DRC.WHO is working with national authorities to obtain more information about cases and laboratory capacity. Investigation and confirmation of suspected cases will help to further understand the range of the virus in DRC.Technical support is being provided to the Ministry of Health to rapidly develop and implement a comprehensive response plan to strengthen surveillance at national and local levels, including further outbreak investigation and response activities.One major challenge to the current emergency includes inadequate funding to respond to the multiple ongoing outbreaks in the country. Weaknesses of surveillance and laboratories, along with a high number of refugees crossing the border from Kasai province into Angola, could all contribute to further spread of the outbreak.The support of partners such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) will be critical for the control of this outbreak. Monkeypox is a sylvatic zoonosis with incidental human infections that occur sporadically in the rain forests of Central and West Africa. It is caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV) which belongs to the Orthopoxvirus family, the same group of viruses as smallpox.There are two distinct clades of monkeypox virus, the Congo Basin clade and the West African clade. Monkeypox due to the Congo Basin clade virus has seen reported mortality of up to 10% of cases, whereas the West African clade usually displays fatal outcomes in less than 1% of cases. HIV infection appears to increase the risk of death in people infected with monkeypox virus.The animal reservoir remains unknown. However, evidence suggests that native African rodents may be potential sources. Contact with live and dead animals through hunting and bush meat are presumed drivers of human infection. The disease is self-limiting with symptoms usually resolving within 14-21 days. Severe cases occur more commonly among children and immunocompromised population, particularly persons with HIV, and are related to the extent of virus exposure, patient health status and severity of complications. The case fatality ratio has varied between epidemics but has been between 1% and 10% in documented events. There is no specific treatment licensed for monkeypox and a recently approved vaccine is not yet widely available for the public sector.Since identification of the first human case of monkeypox in 1970 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then known as Zaire) in a 9-month-old boy, and until the year 1986, 95% of cases worldwide were reported in the DRC. Cases of monkeypox have also been reported from other African countries - Benin, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Nigeria, the Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, and South Sudan. In 2003, an outbreak occurred in the United States of America following the importation of infected animals. Single imported cases were identified in Israel and the United Kingdom in 2018, and in Singapore in 2019, all following diagnosis in travelers from Nigeria. In the UK, a secondary case was confirmed in a health worker.With the eradication of smallpox and the subsequent cessation of routine smallpox vaccination, human monkeypox has appeared with increasing frequency in unvaccinated populations.The risk is assessed as high at national level, moderate at regional level, and low at global level. Several orthopoxviruses, and specifically the monkeypox virus, circulate in wildlife populations and sporadically spill over to affect human beings. Reducing contacts with and reliance on wildlife will enhance disease prevention efforts for zoonoses that affect wildlife, including monkeypox.Strengthening cross-border collaboration with neighboring countries (Republic of Congo, DRC and Central African Republic) including sharing of data and information is needed.Residents and travelers to endemic areas / countries should avoid contact with sick, dead or live animals that could harbor monkeypox virus (rodents, marsupials, primates) and should refrain from eating or handling bush meat. The importance of hand hygiene using soap and water, or alcohol-based sanitizer should be emphasized. Hand washing stations and infection control initiatives such as use of disinfectants should be put in place in hospital settings. Any illness during travel or upon return should be reported to a health professional, including information about all recent travel and immunization history.Timely contact tracing, surveillance measures and raising awareness among health care providers are essential to preventing secondary cases and effective management of monkeypox outbreaks. Infection control in health facilities is crucial. Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox should implement standard, contact and droplet infection control precautions.Samples taken from people and animals with suspected monkeypox virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories. Confirmation of monkeypox depends on the type and quality of the specimen and the type of laboratory test. Thus, specimens should be packaged and shipped in accordance with national and international requirements. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the preferred laboratory test given its accuracy and sensitivity. For this, optimal diagnostic samples for monkeypox are from skin lesions - the roof or fluid from vesicles and pustules, and dry crusts. PCR blood tests are often inconclusive because of the short duration of viremia relative to the timing of specimen collection after symptoms begin. Serology is not indicated to detect acute infection. For these reasons, blood should not be routinely collected from patients unless part of research or a wider outbreak investigation which includes identifying previous cases.Vaccinia vaccine used during the smallpox eradication program was also protective against monkeypox. Some countries and WHO maintain emergency stockpiles of smallpox (vaccinia) vaccine. A new safer third generation vaccinia vaccine (known as modified vaccinia Ankara vaccine) approved in 2019 for prevention of monkeypox is not yet widely available for the public sector. Antiviral agents are also being developed.WHO does not recommend any restriction for travel to and trade with Democratic Republic of the Congo based on available information at this point in time.  From July through 20 September 2020, a total of 27 540 cases were reported in three provinces, distributed as follows: 24 302 cases in the health district of Abéché, 3237 cases in the health district of Biltine, and one case in the health district of Abdi. One death has been reported to date in district of Abéché. After a few hours of treatment in a health facility, patients continue with outpatient treatment. The most affected age group are those aged 15 years and over. More than three-quarters of cases developed a high fever, headache, and joint pain, while one-third developed maculopapular rashes.In July 2020 health authorities were alerted to the occurrence of a disease-causing high fever, headache, intense and disabling joint pain, and sometimes associated with vomiting. It was eventually determined to be the chikungunya virus once it was confirmed in a 63-year-old female farmer. She had no reported travel outside of Abéché district. A total of 13 samples from Abéché district, Ouaddai Province, were sent for analysis at the N'Djamena mobile laboratory on 12 August 2020 and 11 samples tested positive for chikungunya virus.The test results were corroborated by the Pasteur laboratory in Yaoundé, Cameroon (a WHO reference laboratory), with five samples sent for quality control found positive for chikungunya virus by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The samples were also tested for other arboviruses (dengue and Zika), but not for the O'nyong-nyong virus or the yellow fever virus.Regarding the vectors and environmental context, Aedes mosquitoes, which transmit the disease, are found in Abéché district. Dry season should begin in October with a hot semi-arid climate less favourable for mosquitoes. Other entomological studies are underway in the provinces of Wadi-Fira and Sila to determine the presence of the vector responsible for the disease.Abéché is the fourth largest city in Chad and is the hub for the delivery of humanitarian assistance for approximately 240 000 Darfurian refugees living in 12 camps east of the town, in the border region of Sudan.  Chikungunya is an arboviral disease transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes mosquitoes. The disease is characterized by an abrupt onset of fever frequently accompanied by joint pain and inflammation which is often very debilitating and may last for several months, or even years. Fatalities associated with infection can occur but are typically rare and most reported in older adults with underlying medical conditions or perinatally-infected infants. Some patients might have a relapse of rheumatologic symptoms (e.g. polyarthralgia, polyarthritis, and tenosynovitis) in the months following acute illness.There is no specific antiviral treatment or commercially available vaccine for chikungunya. Chikungunya virus can cause large outbreaks with high attack rates, affecting one-third to three-quarters of the population in areas where the virus is circulating, and therefore potentially leading to the overburdening of the health care sector. The risk at national level is moderate due to the high number of cases reported in a short period of time, the presence of Aedes vectors in the country, and the fact that this is the first outbreak in the country. It has been demonstrated in the past in other parts of the world that the virus has a strong epidemic potential in the regions where the population is naive to chikungunya virus. As the dry season is approaching in early October with a hot semi-arid climate less favourable for mosquito proliferation, the risk at regional and global levels is lower. With the added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health system and health workers, there is a risk of disruption to health care access. There may also be decreased demand because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. In the current context, the capacity of the local laboratories and national reference laboratories to process samples (due to the high demand in processing COVID-19 samples) and a further increase in the number of cases likely to occur, this could potentially lead to a significant strain on health services. In Chad, from 19 March through 16 September 2020, there have been 1 090 confirmed cases of COVID-19 with 81 deaths. Clothing which minimizes skin exposure to the day-biting vectors is advised. Repellents can be applied to exposed skin or to clothing in strict accordance with product label instructions. Repellents should contain DEET (N, N-diethyl-3-methylbenzamide), IR3535 (3-[N-acetyl-N-butyl]-aminopropionic acid ethyl ester) or icaridin (1-piperidinecarboxylic acid, 2-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-methylpropylester). Sleep under a mosquito bed net (during day time) and use air conditioning or window screens to prevent mosquito bites. Mosquito coils or other insecticide vaporizers may also reduce indoor biting.The Aedes albopictus species thrives in a wide range of water-filled containers, including tree-holes and rock pools, in addition to artificial containers such as unused vehicle tires, saucers beneath plant pots, rain water barrels, cisterns and catch basins. Aedes aegypti also breeds in the artificial water holding containers in and around houses and places of work. Prevention and control rely heavily on reducing the number of these natural and artificial water-filled container habitats that support breeding of the mosquitoes. This requires mobilization of affected communities, strengthening entomological monitoring to assess impact of control measures and implementation of additional control as and when needed. During outbreaks, indoor spraying with insecticides may be used to kill flying mosquitoes along with source reduction measures and larvicides to kill the immature larvae. National blood services/authorities should monitor epidemiological information and strengthen haemovigilance to identify any potential transfusion-transmission of chikungunya virus. Appropriate safety precautions in line with measures taken to prevent other transfusion-transmitted mosquito-borne viruses should be taken based on the epidemiological situation and risk assessment1.Further activities include: the dissemination of chikungunya clinical guidelines, including key messages; updated training for clinicians of the clinical diagnosis of chikungunya; case reporting; and case management during the acute phase, sub-acute, chronic phase, and when there are complications. Ensuring free access to treatments and avoiding self-medication are also important actions.  1 http://www.who.int/bloodsafety/publications/guide_selection_assessing_suitability.pdf2 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 220; doi:10.3390/ijerph15020220 Three months after the declaration of the eleventh Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in Equateur Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, the number of confirmed cases continues to increase, and the geographic spread of the outbreak continues to expand.As of 1 September 2020, 110 cases (104 confirmed and six probable) including 47 deaths (case fatality ratio 43%) have been reported from 36 health areas in 11 health zones. In the past 21 days (12 August – 1 September 2020), 24 confirmed cases have been reported in 15 health areas across eight health zones. To date, three healthcare workers have been affected, making up 3% of all cases. In addition, 48 people have recovered from EVD to date. The Ministry of Health is leading the response in affected health zones with the support of WHO and partners. Response priorities include strengthening surveillance and contact tracing, enhancing laboratory capacity, implementing adequate clinical management of suspect and confirmed cases, continuing ring vaccination around confirmed cases, vaccinating frontline workers, providing safe and dignified burials, supporting infection prevention and control in health facilities, and engaging with affected communities.Key response measures to date include: A lack of funding is constraining the ability of WHO and partners to respond, as is a lack of sufficient human resources. Scaling-up response activities has been further hampered by ongoing strikes among locally-based response teams. WHO is supporting the Ministry of Health and partners to address this challenge.WHO has not received adequate EVD funding since the start of 2020, and is currently using its emergency funds to support epidemiological and public health interventions. Access to financial and human resources are further challenged by the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak which is putting an additional burden on the national health system. The risk of disruption to surveillance and routine public health activities due to COVID-19 might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly contain re-emergence of these EVD cases. As of 29 August 2020, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported 1044 COVID-19 cases and 258 deaths.In addition, response teams are currently operating in a logistically challenging environment, with many of the affected areas only accessible by boat or helicopter and with limited telecommunications capacity. Further challenges include:Investigations are ongoing in recently affected health zones to assess the full extent of the outbreak and therefore high vigilance should be maintained.On 1 September 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from moderate to high at the regional level, while the risk level remained high at the national level and low at the global level. The level of risk will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information from partners. WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce Ebola virus disease transmission in humans:WHO continues to advise against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this event, based on the currently available information.  On 9 August 2020, the Federal Ministry of Health, Sudan notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country. According to the notification, the virus is genetically-linked with Chad (sequencing results showed 12 to 19 nucleotide changes). Two Acute Flaccid Paralysis (AFP) cases were notified. The first case, a child of 48 months, had onset of paralysis on 7 March 2020 and was from Sulbi city of Kas locality in South Darfur state. The state is in the west of the country, bordering Central African Republic, South Sudan and close to the border with Chad. The second case, a child of 36 months, had onset of paralysis on 1 April 2020 and was from Shari city of AI Gedarif locality in Gedarif state in the east, close to the border with Eritrea and Ethiopia. Both children received the their last bOPV ( type 1 & 3) dose in 2019. Initial investigation indicates these cases are linked to cVDPV2s from the CHA-NDJ-1 emergence group which was first detected in October 2019 and is currently circulating in Chad and Cameroon. Eleven additional suspected cases have also been confirmed as cVDPV2 and field investigation reports are being consolidated. These cases are in the following states – Red Sea, West Darfur, East Darfur, White Nile, River Nile and Gezira. Hence, between 9 August and 26 August 2020, there have been a total of 13 cVDPV2 cases reported. Additionally, three cVDPV2-positive environmental samples from Soba, Elgoz and Hawasha sites from Khartoum were detected (samples collected on 29 March 2020). Sequencing of viruses isolated in Sudan so far reflects that the viruses are related with viruses reported earlier in neighboring Chad from where there were multiple separate introductions into Sudan from Chad. There is local circulation in Sudan and continued sharing of transmission with Chad. Following the detection of cVDPV2 in the country, the following response activities are being planned and/or implemented:  It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for Acuter Flaccid Paralysis in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from polio-affected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts to limit the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency and consider vaccination of all international travelers who live or visited the country for four weeks or longer. Countries infected by cVDPV2 should encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel. On 23 July 2020, the France IHR National Focal Point reported a confirmed autochthonous (locally acquired) case of yellow fever in a 14-year-old male in French Guiana. On 17 July 2020, the case was laboratory confirmed at the French National Reference Centre for arboviruses, Institute Pasteur Cayenne. The case-patient had severe disability, and developed dengue-like symptoms on 12 July. On 16 July, he was hospitalized in an intensive care unit in Cayenne, French Guiana, with consciousness disorders and acute liver failure, and died on 19 July. The case-patient’s vaccination history at Mother and Child Welfare Center showed evidence of vaccination for yellow fever at the age of 18 months, however, this was not confirmed by his immunization booklet. In addition, there was no evidence of recommended booster dose as recommended in French Guiana for children between 6 and 10 years of age who were vaccinated before 2 years of age. An initial serology carried out by the Institute Pasteur Cayenne showed absence of detectable antibodies.The case-patient lived in the village of Cayodé, commune of Maripasoula in French Guiana, with no history of travel outside of the Village. The village of Cayodé is located in the heart of the Amazonian forest, on the riverside, 1-2 hours by pirogue from the town of Maripasoula. According to preliminary results of the epidemiological investigation, the probable place of infection is Maripasoula, Haut-Maroni in French GuianaA reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test was conducted at French National Reference Centre for arboviruses, Institute Pasteur Cayenne and was positive for both yellow fever and COVID-19.Vaccination coverage in the Amerindian country of Upper Maroni is estimated to be between 95 and 100% (estimated at 97.9% in the commune of Maripasoula).1The epidemiological investigations are nearly complete including an evaluation of the vaccination status of the inhabitants of Cayodé and Haut Maroni, in order to find people who are either not vaccinated or have doubts about their vaccination status. Aedes aegypti , an urban vector for yellow fever virus, is largely present in French Guiana.This is the third confirmed case of yellow fever diagnosed since 2017, and the first documented case of co-infection with COVID 19 and yellow fever in French Guiana.Yellow fever is an acute viral hemorrhagic disease that has the potential to spread rapidly and cause serious public health impact in unimmunized population. Vaccination is the most important means of preventing the infection. French Guiana is considered at risk for yellow fever transmission. Vaccination coverage in French Guiana is very high and expected to be protective against large-scale yellow fever outbreaks; however, the coverage in some specific populations (especially from the Amazonian area) could be suboptimal and therefore at risk for yellow fever infections. As several countries and territories in the yellow fever endemic areas are also experiencing an intense transmission of SARS-CoV-2, further cases with co-infection may occur. Similarly, the co-circulation of yellow fever virus and SARS-CoV-2 in areas with higher bed occupancy rates in Intensive Care Units, pose an additional challenge for case management and infection and prevention control activities.With the global circulation of the virus causing COVID-19, there is a risk of disruption of access to health care due to both COVID-19 related burden on the health system and health care workers. The Pandemic has also led to decreased demand for health care and impacted the routine vaccination activities because of physical distancing requirements. An increase in the number of yellow fever cases or other vaccine preventable diseases (VPD) may result in increased morbidity and mortality predominantly in young infants and other vulnerable groups.Another aspect in consideration in the light of the current COVID-19 pandemic, is the capacity of the local laboratories and national reference laboratories to process samples due the over demand in processing COVID-19 samples. As of 25 July, French Guiana has reported 7 251 of COVID 19 cases and 41 deaths.Vaccination coverage should be improved particularly in persons living and working in the forest, who are exposed during the day to sylvatic vectors. It should also be improved in migrants and other vulnerable populations who are more susceptible to being unvaccinated and live in densely populated urban areas (with a risk of urban local transmission), or participate to illegal activities in the forest (with a risk of sporadic cases or clusters in a sylvatic context).Yellow fever is endemic in French Guiana. This case report illustrates the importance of maintaining awareness of the need for yellow fever vaccination, especially in areas with favorable ecosystem for yellow fever transmission.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever at least 10 days prior to the travel for all international travelers to French Guiana, from nine months of age. French Guiana also requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate for travelers over one year of age.Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. In accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005), Third edition, the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travelers as a condition of entry. While countries have different vaccination schedules, the French Guiana Regional Health Agency recommends that children vaccinated before their second birthday require a booster dose between 6 to 10 years of age.WHO has published guiding principles for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and is currently developing specific operational guidance for conducting mass vaccination campaigns in the COVID-19 context. When conditions permit, the EYE Strategy will support rapid resumption of preventive yellow fever activities according to  WHO guidance.WHO encourage its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travelers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travelers should also be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice when presenting signs. Travelers returning to French Guiana who may be infected with yellow fever may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to French Guiana on the basis of the information available. The health zone of Rethy in Ituri province, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has seen an upsurge of plague cases since June 2020. The first case, a 12-year-old girl, reported to a local health centre on 12 June experiencing a headache, fever, cough, and an enlarged lymph node. She died on the same day and further deaths from the community due to suspected cases of plague were subsequently reported.From 11 June though 15 July, six out of 22 health areas have been affected within Rethy health zone (11 villages), with a total of 45 cases including nine deaths (case fatality rate: 20%). All nine (9) cases who died presented with signs of headache, high fever, and painful nodes; four (4) out of the nine (9) cases had cough.The health zone team carried out an investigation resulting in five positive rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). Nine additional samples were taken and shipped to the Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale (INRB) laboratory in Kinshasa. Of the 45 cases reported, two showed signs of septicemic plague; all the other cases were diagnosed as having bubonic plague. According to the available information, it is likely that all three types of plague clinical presentation (bubonic, septicemic and pneumonic) are present.The distribution by sex shows 58% (26/45) are male and 93% (42/45) are greater than five years old. Of the 45 cases reported, nine including four who died, had cough among the symptoms - a sign indicating a potential progression from bubonic plague to pulmonary plague. This was specifically noticed among the deceased.Plague is endemic in Ituri province. Since the beginning of 2020, Ituri Province has reported a total of 64 plague cases and 14 deaths (CFR:21.8%) in five health zones, namely Aungba, Linga, Rethy, Aru and Kambala health zones. This compares against 10 cases and 5 deaths (lethality 50.0%) during the same period in 2019, all in a single zone.The current COVID-19 epidemic affects seven out of 26 provinces in the country. Ituri has also reported cases of COVID-191 that may further interrupt response activities due to lockdown. These are in addition to long standing public health response challenges identified in the region, including a lack of resources and insecurity. Although it has been reported that there is no significant impact of the COVID-19 context on activities taking place in this area, there is limited information available on the current access to health care. This includes whether or not there is a need for the population of Ituri to seek care in Uganda, as well as the availability of human resources, drugs, and personal protective equipment (PPE). Furthermore, the reference laboratory in Bunia, Ituri province is currently not functional, which might delay the confirmation of suspected cases and response efforts.  Infection with plague can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality in humans, particularly if not identified early. Plague can exhibit in three forms: bubonic, septicemic and pneumonic. If untreated, bubonic plague can evolve to pneumonic plague. Early diagnosis and treatment are essential for survival and reduction of complications.Rethy health zone is endemic for plague and regularly registers cases of enzootic variants of Yersinia pestis, in much of the wild rodent population. Its first outbreak was reported in February 2020 with cases imported from Linga health zone, based in the Godjoka health area.On the security level, there are reports of atrocities and violence linked to the militia CODECO which continues to impact the population of this territory (Djugu and its surroundings). There have been mass population displacements within Djugu and Mahagi Territories. Currently, the Rethy Health Zone has received approximately 112 714 internally displaced persons (IDPs), most of whom have come from the Jiba and Linga Health Zone. The growing insecurity impacts traffic flow between the villages and the willingness of the population to either stay or work in that area. There has also been a deterioration of water, hygiene and sanitation conditions in the reception areas and in the IDP sites.The early detection and reporting of the current outbreak by healthcare workers demonstrate that a functioning surveillance system is in place. Ituri province had a reference laboratory in Bunia which is no longer functional. The Institut National de la Recherce Biomedicale (INRB) laboratory based in Kinshasa/DRC has the ability to conduct laboratory testing for suspected cases. However, delays in shipping samples from Rethy to Bunia and then to Kinshasa, and delays in testing in Kinshasa INRB due to high workload and backload related to COVID-19 samples to be tested, might jeopardize the surveillance and response. Ongoing efforts are required to ensure that any other cases are promptly detected, isolated, and investigated to avoid the establishment of local transmission.The risk at national level is considered to be moderate given: the evolution of the current situation is in danger of deteriorating rapidly (case fatality rate: 20%), the notification of cases of pulmonary plague, the challenges with the surveillance system and delays between sample collection and laboratory confirmation, and the volatile security situation and the existence of other epidemics in progress in the country which prevents the setting up of a more comprehensive response. Furthermore, the health zone currently does not have enough PPE, body bags and materials needed for decontamination. Malteser International, an NGO that supplies the health zone with drugs, has had difficulty getting the products into the zone because of insecurity on the RN27 road.The principles of control are known and have been implemented (early treatment with the recommended antibiotics, isolation of the pneumonic cases, chemoprophylaxis given to the close contacts of the latest ones, rodent and flea control, safe and dignified burials, and the prevention of nosocomial transmission) but the means are limited and the health system is unable to manage the cases in the most appropriate way. The antibiotics used for the treatment of the cases are Doxycycline, Ciprofloxacin and Cotrimoxazole. For the pulmonary or septicemic form case, Gentamycin was administrated. The lack of laboratory confirmation is worrying but the use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDT) on the field ensures a minimum of confirmation among the suspected cases. The RDTs are especially reliable to confirm bubonic plague suspected forms.The risk at regional level is considered low since the epidemic seems to be contained in the Rethy health zone and that it is an isolated region. The risk is considered low globally. Bubonic plague is the most common form of plague and is caused by the bite of an infected flea. The plague bacillus, Y. pestis, enters at the bite site and travels through the lymphatic system to the nearest lymph node where it replicates. At advanced stages of the infection, the inflamed lymph nodes can turn into suppurating open sores. There is no inter-human transmission of bubonic plague.Untreated, bubonic plague can advance and spread to the lungs, which is the more severe type of plague called pneumonic plague, the most virulent form of plague. Incubation period can be as short as 24 hours. Any person with pneumonic plague may transmit the disease via droplets to other humans. Untreated pneumonic plague, if not diagnosed and treated early, is almost always fatal. However, the probability of recovery is high if detected and treated in time (within 24 hours of onset of symptoms).Early diagnosis and treatment are essential for survival and reduction of complications. Appropriate diagnostic samples include blood cultures, lymph node aspirates if possible, and/or sputum, if indicated. Drug therapy should begin as soon as possible after the laboratory specimens are taken. Post-exposure prophylaxis is indicated in persons with known exposure to plague, such as close contact with a pneumonic plague patient or direct contact with infected body fluids or tissues. Duration of post-exposure prophylaxis to prevent plague is seven days.Preventive measures include informing people when zoonotic plague is present in their environment and advising them to take precautions against flea bites and not to handle animal carcasses. People, especially health workers, should also avoid direct contact with infected tissues such as buboes, or close exposure to patients with pneumonic plague.Recommended response measures for all forms of plague:  1As of 16 July 2020, there have been 8 162 confirmed COVID-19 cases including 191 deaths in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Between 1 April and 31 May 2020, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported nine new cases of MERS-CoV infection, including five deaths. The cases were reported from Riyadh (seven cases), Assir (one case) and Northern (one case) Regions. Most cases were and ages of the reported cases ranged from 40 to 96 years.Of the cases reported in Riyadh six were from a hospital outbreak in the region between 21 and 31 May 2020: an index case who was a newly admitted patient, and five secondary cases identified through contact tracing. One of the secondary cases was a health care worker and the other four were in-patients admitted due to other health conditions. All four in-patients were bedridden and above 75 years of age. All reported cases had comorbidities with the exception of the healthcare worker.The link below provides details of the nine reported cases.MERS-CoV cases reported from 1 April through 31 May 2020Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedaries, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Since 2012 until 31 May 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2 562 with 881 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management, and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV is more severe in infected people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. On 25 June 2020, the Minister of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the end of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces . In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made more than 42 days after the last person who contracted EVD in this outbreak tested negative twice and was discharged from care.The outbreak was declared on 1 August 2018 following investigations and laboratory confirmation of a cluster of EVD cases in North Kivu Province. Further investigations identified cases in Ituri and North Kivu Provinces with dates of symptom onset from May to August 2018. In 2019, the outbreak subsequently spread to South Kivu Province, and on 17 July 2019, the WHO Director-General declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 11 outbreaks have been recorded since the first recognized outbreak in 1976. The 10th EVD outbreak in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces was the country's longest EVD outbreak and the second largest in the world after the 2014–2016 EVD outbreak in West Africa.The response to the outbreak was led by the Ministry of Health with support from WHO and partners in the areas of surveillance, contact tracing, laboratory services, infection prevention and control (IPC), clinical management, community engagement, safe and dignified burials, response coordination and preparedness activities in neighbouring provinces. The engagement of local leaders, communities and survivors in EVD survivor care programmes and community messaging played a central role in curtailing the outbreak. Challenges in establishing trust with affected communities, reticence for admission to Ebola treatment facilities, a high level of insecurity due to the presence of armed groups in the affected areas, as well as a series of attacks against health workers contributed to the difficulty of containing this outbreak.Despite these challenges, no new confirmed cases have been reported since April 2020, and North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces were declared Ebola-free 23 months after the first cases were reported. June 2020 marks the beginning of the handover of outbreak response and surveillance activities from the central government and international partners to the Provincial Health Divisions.From 17 to 23 June 2020, an average of 2790 alerts were reported per day and investigated. Of these, over 99% were investigated within 24 hours, and an average of 428 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule out EVD. Sustained numbers of alerts have been reported daily since April 2020 due to strengthened capacity to detect emergent cases and continuous support of provincial health divisions and the Ministry of Health. The timely testing of suspected cases was achieved by a network of eight laboratories. From 15 to 21 June 2020, a total of 3219 samples were tested including 2665 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 323 swabs from community deaths; and 344 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, the number of samples tested by the laboratories increased by 4% compared to the previous week.From 1 August 2018 to 25 June 2020, a total of 3470 EVD cases were reported from 29 health zones including 3317 confirmed cases and 153 probable cases. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1974) were female, 29% (n=1006) were children aged less than 18 years and 5% (n=171) were health care workers. There were 2287 deaths recorded (overall case fatality ratio 66%), 33% (1152/3470) of cases died outside of Ebola treatment centres, and 1171 cases recovered from EVD. Over the course of the outbreak, more than 250 000 contacts of cases were registered in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces.On 25 June 2020, the Democratic Republic of the Congo entered a 90-day period of heightened surveillance. Although human-to-human transmission of Ebola virus has ended in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces and the outbreak has officially been declared over, the risk of re-emergence still exists. Therefore, there is a critical need to maintain response operations to rapidly detect and respond to any new cases and to prioritize ongoing support and care for people who recovered from EVD.Ebola virus can persist in some body fluids of survivors for several months, and in rare cases may result in secondary transmission or in relapse, as seen in this outbreak. In addition, Ebola virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region, so there is continued risk of zoonotic spillover. Given that cases may continue to occur from time to time in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, maintaining a robust surveillance system and response operations to rapidly detect, isolate, test and treat new suspected cases are essential.*Excludes n=71/3470 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Other zones’ indicate health zones other than Kalunguta, Mandima, Mabalako, Beni, Butembo & Katwa Health Zones which have been affected by EVD.In response to this EVD outbreak, from 1 August 2018 to 25 June 2020:For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the CongoThe latest WHO assessment concluded that the current EVD outbreak has been contained, considering that more than 42 days (two incubation periods) have elapsed since the date of the second consecutive negative test of the last case confirmed case on 13 May 2020. On 26 June 2020, WHO maintained the risk assessment for this event as Moderate at the national and regional levels, and the risk level remained Low at the global level.Under the Consolidation and Stabilization Strategic Plan adopted by the Ministry of Health, enhanced surveillance, a long-term programme for Ebola survivor care, and other response mechanisms remain in place following the end of the outbreak declaration to maintain increased vigilance and contribute to strengthening and resilience of the local health systems.Given that EVD is likely to persist in an animal reservoir in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a new zoonotic spillover event may occur. Moreover, an EVD cluster may also occur from exposure to body fluids of survivors, although the probability of this will reduce over time.WHO considers ongoing challenges in access and security, community trust in authorities, fragile health systems, coupled with the emergence of coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), cholera, measles and the EVD outbreak recently reported in Équateur Province, as factors that might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to the re-emergence of EVD cases in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces.As per the advice of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee, which was convened on 26 June 2020, the WHO Director-General declared that the EVD outbreak in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu Provinces no longer constitutes a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 26 June 2020WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans:WHO continues to advise against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this event based on the currently available information. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. No new confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 27 April 2020 (Figure 1). While this is a positive development, there remains a risk of re-emergence of EVD. It is critical to maintain surveillance and response operations in the period leading up to the declaration of the end of the outbreak, as well as after the declaration – as outlined in the WHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the EVD outbreak .From 11 to 16 June 2020, an average of 2939 alerts were reported per day, of which 2788 (about 95%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 453 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. The number of reported and validated alerts has remained stable in recent weeks. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 8 to 14 June 2020, 3219 samples were tested including 2513 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 324 swabs from community deaths; and 382 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, the number of samples tested by the laboratories increased by 3% compared to the previous week.As of 16 June 2020, a total of 3463 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 146 probable cases have been reported, of which 2280 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%), and 1171 have recovered. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.For information about the EVD outbreak in Équateur Province see the WHO Regional Office for Africa Weekly bulletins on outbreaks and other emergencies .*Excludes n=68/3463 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the CongoOn 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020   On 15 April 2020, WHO received information regarding a confirmed case of yellow fever in Magandi village, Tchibanga city in Nyanga Province of southern Gabon, 590 km from the capital, Libreville.The case is an 83-year-old male with no known vaccination history for yellow fever. He had onset of symptoms on 30 January 2020 and presented to a health facility on 2 February 2020 with abdominal pain and jaundice. Between 2 February and 9 April, he consulted the Urban Health Centre in Tchibanga, the Christian Alliance Hospital in Bongolo and the University hospital in the capital Libreville where the case received anti-malarial treatment and remained hospitalized until his death on 9 April 2020. On 14 April 2020, the laboratory results received from the WHO Regional Reference Laboratory at the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal, confirmed yellow fever infection, by seroneutralisation test. The additional differential diagnostic tests performed were negative for dengue, West Nile fever, chikungunya, Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic fever, Zika and Rift Valley fever.On 15 April 2020, a multi-disciplinary investigation was conducted in Tchibanga by the Ministry of Health (MoH) with technical support from WHO. According to the field investigation report, the case had no recent travel history prior to the onset of illness and no additional cases were found in the community despite extensive case finding activities.The last cases of yellow fever in Gabon were detected in 2019. These two confirmed cases of yellow fever were in unvaccinated international workers in the health district of Mitzic, Woleu-Ntem Region.The yellow fever vaccine was introduced into routine immunization in 2000. Yellow fever vaccination coverage in Gabon is reported to be suboptimal (less than 85%) (WHO/UNICEF estimates, 2018). The case is from Mongo health area, where vaccination coverage is 76% in 2020. Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease that has the potential to spread rapidly and cause serious public health impact in unvaccinated populations.The detection of the confirmed case of yellow fever in Nyanga Province shows the possibility of spill-over of sylvatic yellow fever in endemic areas to unvaccinated people in a rural area even in the context of moderately high population immunity (70%). This highlights the importance of achieving and maintaining high population immunity in all high-risk areas for yellow fever.There is currently a risk of disruption to routine immunization activities due to COVID-19 related impacts on the health system and a decreased demand for immunization due to physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services, even for brief periods, will increase the numbers of susceptible people and the likelihood of outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases. As of 12 June 2020, there have been 3,463 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Gabon.Gabon is a high priority country for the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemic (EYE) strategy. Vaccination is the primary intervention for the prevention and control of yellow fever. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreak.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers to Gabon, from nine months of age.Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. In accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005), the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO has published guiding principles for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and has developed specific operational guidance for conducting mass vaccination campaigns in the COVID-19 context. The EYE Strategy will support rapid resumption of preventive yellow fever activities according to WHO guidance.WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures, including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of yellow fever signs and symptoms and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if experiencing signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Travellers returning to Gabon who may be infected with yellow fever may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Gabon on the basis of the information available on this outbreak. No new confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 27 April 2020 (Figure 1).The source of infection of the cluster reported in April 2020 remains unconfirmed.From 4 to 10 June 2020, an average of 3357 alerts were reported per day, of which 3346 (over 99%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 545 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. The number of reported and validated alerts has remained stable in recent weeks. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 1 to 7 June 2020, 3130 samples were tested including 2421 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 331 swabs from community deaths; and 378 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, the number of samples tested by the laboratories increased by 4% compared to the previous week.As of 9 June 2020, a total of 3463 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 146 probable cases have been reported, of which 2280 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%), and 1171 have recovered. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.Handover of outbreak response and surveillance activities from the central government and International partners to the Provincial Health Department (DPS) started on 1 June and is ongoing.For information about the EVD outbreak in Équateur Province see the WHO Regional Office for Africa Ebola Virus Disease Situation Report issued 9 June 2020.*Excludes n=68/3463 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.Disease outbreak news: Update
11 June 2020No new confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 27 April 2020 (Figure 1).The source of infection of the cluster reported in April 2020 remains unconfirmed.From 4 to 10 June 2020, an average of 3357 alerts were reported per day, of which 3346 (over 99%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 545 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. The number of reported and validated alerts has remained stable in recent weeks. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 1 to 7 June 2020, 3130 samples were tested including 2421 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 331 swabs from community deaths; and 378 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, the number of samples tested by the laboratories increased by 4% compared to the previous week.As of 9 June 2020, a total of 3463 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 146 probable cases have been reported, of which 2280 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%), and 1171 have recovered. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.Handover of outbreak response and surveillance activities from the central government and International partners to the Provincial Health Department (DPS) started on 1 June and is ongoing.For information about the EVD outbreak in Équateur Province see the WHO Regional Office for Africa Ebola Virus Disease Situation Report issued 9 June 2020.*Excludes n=68/3463 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the CongoOn 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020WHO resources and information on Ebola virus diseaseWHO resources and information on Ebola survivorsWHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the Ebola virus disease outbreakStatement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020Ebola response fundingOn 20 April 2020, WHO received information regarding a confirmed yellow fever case in Galangashie health area, located 30 km from Mango village, Oti district, Savanes region in the northern part of Togo.The case is a 55-year-old woman with no vaccination history for yellow fever. She had onset of symptoms on 31 January 2020 and presented to a health facility on 3 February 2020 with fever and aches. The following day she developed jaundice and a blood sample was taken. On 7 February , the blood sample was transported to the national laboratory. On 10 February , the sample from the case was received at the national laboratory and test results on 17 March were Immunoglobulin M (IgM) positive for yellow fever. The positive yellow fever result was confirmed by the Institute Pasteur in Dakar Senegal, a yellow fever reference laboratory on 14 April 2020 by seroneutralisation.On 22 March 2020, a multi-disciplinary investigation was conducted. According to the field investigation report, the case had no recent travel history prior to the onset of illness and no additional cases were found during active case finding in the community. The parents of the case reported that she was vaccinated in 2007; however no vaccination certificate is available. According to a survey conducted as part of the investigation, no additional cases of acute febrile jaundice were identified and 84% (132/157) of respondents reported previous yellow fever vaccination (through verbal recall and/or vaccination cards).Togo has a robust febrile jaundice surveillance system, with weekly case reporting and sample testing. In 2019, 349 cases of febrile jaundice were reported and tested negative for yellow fever in the laboratory. All 44 health districts reported at least one case of febrile jaundice in 2019.The last yellow fever outbreak in Togo occurred during late 2006 and early 2007, when three cases were reported from two adjacent districts: Dankpen district, Kara region and Oti district, Savanes region in the northern part of the country. In January 2007, two additional laboratory confirmed cases were reported: one from Kara region (Kozah district) and one from Maritime region (Lacs district). During preparation for the outbreak campaign, two additional laboratory confirmed cases were reported from Haho district. Following this outbreak, a national reactive vaccination campaign was conducted in 2007 and covered the entire country, targeting over 5.3 million people with over 102% reported administrative coverage.From January to April 2020, 52 cases of febrile jaundice were reported, including one confirmed case of yellow fever in Oti district.The yellow fever vaccine was introduced into routine immunization in January 2005. Yellow fever vaccination coverage in Togo is reported to be high (>85%), however, it is lower in the affected health area (Galangashie) (78% coverage in 2019). As a whole, Savanes region had a high coverage following the 2007 mass vaccination campaigns.While immunity gaps may persist or have been introduced following population movements, there is a relatively high population immunity that has benefited from past vaccination activities and is anticipated to be protective against a widespread epidemic. This confirmed case illustrates that occasional yellow fever cases may occur in unvaccinated individuals due to sylvatic transmission, even in the context of high population immunity. This case underscores the importance of ensuring every person living in a high-risk area has lifelong protection afforded them by a single dose of yellow fever vaccine. The detection of the yellow fever case in Savanes region shows that even in the context of relatively high population immunity there is a possibility of sylvatic yellow fever in unvaccinated people in rural areas. This highlights the importance of maintaining high population immunity in all high-risk areas for yellow fever. Recent entomological studies have indicated the presence of competent vectors, including the Aedes species, and the potential for spread to surrounding regions.The onset of the rainy season could increase the density of mosquito vectors, further exacerbating the risk of spread.While mass immunization took place in Togo in 2007, the country is considered to be high risk for endemic transmission. Unvaccinated people remain vulnerable to yellow fever infection, particularly in rural areas.Due to current COVID-19 pandemic, there is a risk of disruption to routine immunization activities due to both COVID-19 related burdens on the health system and a decreased demand for vaccination because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. A disruption of immunization services, even for brief periods, will result in increased numbers of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone vaccine preventable diseases. As of 04 June 2020, there have been 452 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Togo.Togo is a high priority country for the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemic (EYE) strategy. In January 2005 the yellow fever vaccination was introduced into the routine immunization programme in Togo. Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreak.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers to Togo, from nine months of age. Togo also requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate for travellers aged nine months or older arriving from countries with risk of yellow fever transmission and for travellers having more than 12 hours of transit through an airport in a country with risk of yellow fever transmission.Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. In accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005), Third edition, the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO has published guiding principles for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and is currently developing specific operational guidance for conducting mass vaccination campaigns in the COVID-19 context. When conditions permit, the EYE Strategy will support rapid resumption of preventive yellow fever vaccination activities according to WHO guidance.WHO encourage its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures, including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if experiencing signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Travellers returning to Togo who may be infected with possible high levels of the virus in the blood may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Togo on the basis of the information available on this outbreak.WHO yellow fever fact sheetWHO strategy for yellow fever epidemic preparedness and responseWHO list of countries with vaccination requirements and recommendations for international travellersA Global strategy to Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) 2017-2026, WHO 2018,Guiding principles for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemicA Global Strategy to Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE), document for SAGE – 26 September 2016Framework for decision-making: implementation of mass vaccination campaigns in the context of COVID-19No new confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 27 April 2020 (Figure 1).The source of infection of the cluster reported in April 2020 remains unconfirmed.From 27 May to 2 June 2020, an average of 2870 alerts were reported per day, of which 2867 (over 99%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 438 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. The number of reported and validated alerts has remained stable in recent weeks. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 25 to 31 May 2020, 3017 samples were tested including 2295 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 308 swabs from community deaths; and 414 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, the number of samples tested by the laboratories was similar to the previous week.As of 2 June 2020, a total of 3463 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 146 probable cases have been reported, of which 2280 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%), and 1171 have recovered. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.Handover of outbreak response and surveillance activities from the central government and International partners to the Provincial Health Department (DPS) started on 1 June.On 1 June 2020, the Ministry of Health in the Democratic Republic of the Congo notified WHO of a new outbreak of EVD in Mbandaka city, Équateur Province which involved an initial cluster of four deaths that occurred between 18 and 30 May 2020.*Excludes n=68/3463 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the Congo On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information regarding this EVD outbreak. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this EVD outbreak. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.WHO resources and information on Ebola virus diseaseWHO resources and information on Ebola survivorsWHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the Ebola virus disease outbreakStatement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020Ebola response fundingPress release: New Ebola outbreak detected in northwest Democratic Republic of the Congo; WHO surge team supporting the responseOn 31 May 2020, WHO received information that between 18 and 30 May, four deaths were reported from the same quarter (quartier Air Congo) in Mbandaka Health Zone, Mbandaka city, Equateur Province, the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All cases had experienced fever and bleeding prior to their deaths. Of the four patients who died, two of them visited the General Reference Hospital (HGR) in Wangata; a sample (swab) was taken from one of them who died on 30 May. Safe and dignified burials were not performed for these four patients.On 31 May, the brother of the probable case who died on 22 May and his wife presented to HGR Wangata; both had fever, non-bloody diarrhoea and vomiting. They were placed in isolation after blood samples were collected.The three samples including two blood samples and a swab, were analyzed at a laboratory in Mbandaka where all three samples tested positive for Ebola virus disease (EVD) by GeneXpert Ebola assay. One of the three samples (swab) was sent on 31 May 2020, to the Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale (INRB) in Kinshasa and tested positive for Zaire Ebolavirus using polymerase chain reaction (PCR).As of 2 June 2020, eight epidemiologically-linked cases, including two confirmed alive cases, two suspected cases and four deaths (one confirmed and three probable deaths), have been reported. The Ministry of Health (MOH) officially declared the outbreak in Equateur Province on 1 June 2020.Equateur Province experienced an EVD outbreak with 54 cases and 33 deaths, reported between 8 May 2018 through 24 July 2018. This is the eleventh outbreak of EVD reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the virus was discovered in 1976.In the context of the current COVID-19 outbreak, the health capacity and resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are already strained and causing additional burdens on the national health system. The risk of disruption to surveillance and routine public health activities due to COVID-19 might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly contain re-emergence of these EVD cases. As of 2 June 2020, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported 3 194 COVID-19 cases and 71 deaths.WHO, with the MOH, are implementing a coordinated rapid response to stop the spread of the outbreak, and to identify any other suspect cases and initiate contact tracing. In-depth epidemiological investigation and contact tracing were initiated on 31 May 2020.The MOH, with support from WHO and partners have planned the following actions:The laboratory capacity in Mbandaka is being assessed and support is on-going for appropriate set-up and additional supplies. Safe and dignified burial activities could resume shortly following proper community engagement. Support for case management is also important to ensure provision of care to affected individuals.WHO did not receive adequate EVD funding since the start of 2020, and is currently using its emergency funds to support the epidemiological and public health interventions. Financial and human resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, WHO, and partners are challenged by the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak.WHO notes that the current resurgence is undesirable, but not unexpected given the identification of wildlife spillover potential in Africa, accompanied by the high population density in the region and considering the sociological, ecological, and environmental drivers that could influence the emergence of EVD.There is a need for: epidemiologists to conduct disease surveillance; infection prevention and control (IPC) specialists; vaccinators; case management and laboratory staff; and, risk communication and community engagement experts. Materials for infection prevention and control (IPC) and personal protective equipment (PPE), cold-chain, reagents for laboratory diagnostics, and means of transportation are required for the teams.The area where the cases and deaths were reported, is populated with poor and vulnerable populations, known to be reluctant to social mobilization. This might pose further challenges in terms of case investigation, contact tracing, safe and dignified burials, and vaccination in the coming days.Additional challenges have been identified regarding:The investigations are ongoing to assess the full extent of the outbreak and therefore high vigilance should be maintained. This information will help define the risk in the coming days. Ebola virus disease transmission in humans:WHO continues to advise against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. From 20 to 26 May 2020, no new cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Figure 1).Since the resurgence of the outbreak on 10 April 2020, seven confirmed cases have been reported from Kasanga, Malepe and Kanzulinzuli Health Areas in Beni Health Zone. Investigations into the origin of the last cluster of cases in Beni Health Zone are ongoing. To date, no definitive source of infection has been identified.From 20 to 26 May 2020, an average of 2715 alerts were reported per day, of which 2709 (over 99%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 404 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. In the past two weeks, there was a slight decrease in overall and validated alerts in Beni Health Zone. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 18 to 24 May 2020, 3065 samples were tested including 2313 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 331 swabs from community deaths; and 421 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities increased by 7% compared to the previous week.On 22 May, two historic probable cases reported in Mabalako and Lubero Health Zones were validated from people who had onset of symptoms in March 2019 and July 2019. As of 26 May 2020, a total of 3463 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 146 probable cases have been reported. Of these, 2280 people died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) and 1171 survived. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.On 14 May 2020, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo began the 42-day countdown to the declaration of the end of the EVD outbreak. Given the long duration and large magnitude of this outbreak and the fact that the virus is present in animal reservoirs in the region, there is a risk of re-emergence of the virus in the period leading up to, and beyond, the declaration of the end of the outbreak. It is crucial to maintain a strong and robust surveillance system in order to detect, isolate, test and treat new suspected cases as early as possible and to break possible chains of transmission. Continued coordination and communication among partners, authorities and affected communities along with EVD survivor advocacy remain essential in this outbreak response.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information regarding this EVD outbreak. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this EVD outbreak. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Between 2 and 8 April 2020, six suspected human cases of dracunculiasis in Duli village, Gog district, Gambella region, Ethiopia, were reported to WHO. As of 27 April 2020, the Ethiopian Dracunculiasis Eradication Program (EDEP) had detected one additional person with an emerged worm, morphologically consistent with human guinea worm, bringing the total to seven suspected cases. This report comes after more than two consecutive years of zero reporting, as the last cases were reported in December 2017. Since its establishment in 1993, the EDEP has made remarkable progress towards interruption of disease transmission in humans despite the existence of low-level transmission of the parasite in non-human hosts such as dogs and peri-domestic baboons.Of the seven suspected cases, five were detected from the Angota side of Duli village and two suspected cases from Metaget Dipach and Wadmaro villages in Gog Dipach Kebele. All the infected people used unsafe drinking water from farm ponds. These water sources were reported to be associated with the baboon infection in June 2019 in the same village.Worm specimens from all the suspected cases have been collected and are ready for shipment to the US Centers for Disease Control laboratory for confirmation1. Morphologically, all specimens are consistent with Dracunculus medinensis.*The seven cases of 2020 are pending confirmationIn response to the outbreak, a team composed of members from the Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI), Gambella Regional Health Bureau (RHB) and The Carter Center (TCC), the main global partner of WHO in support of guinea worm eradication, carried out a preliminary investigation and instituted immediate intervention measures.These include: Dracunculiasis, one of the Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs), is caused by the parasite Dracunculus medinensis (nematode-roundworm).It is transmitted usually by drinking water containing water fleas-also called copepods (small crustaceans) which are infected with larvae of D. medinensis. Eating uncooked fish or other aquatic animals bearing the guinea worm infected larvae is another plausible route of transmission. Following ingestion, the larvae migrate through the intestinal wall into body tissues, where they develop into adult worms and slowly migrate in the subcutaneous tissues toward the skin surface, causing painful blisters that rupture when it comes in contact with water, allowing the female worm to emerge and release larvae.The larvae are ingested by the copepods and after two weeks, these larvae metamorphose in the body cavities of the copepods and become infective. From the time infection occurs, it takes between 10–14 months for the transmission cycle to complete until a mature worm emerges from the body.Symptoms of guinea worm disease can include the following: Dizziness, a mild fever, uncomfortable rash, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.While the death rate is low, disability is a common outcome of guinea worm disease: infected people become non-functional for weeks or months. People have difficulty moving around because of the pain and complications caused by secondary bacterial infections. The disability that occurs during worm removal and recovery prevents people from working in their fields, tending animals, going to school, and caring for their families; hence, creating an economic and social burden for affected communities along with a vicious circle of poverty.It affects people in rural, deprived and isolated communities who depend mainly on open surface water sources such as ponds for drinking water. Guinea worm disease occurs in the poorest 10% of the world’s population who have no access to safe drinking water or health care. People who live in villages where there has been a case of guinea worm disease in a human or animal in the recent past are at greatest risk.While Guinea worm transmission is limited to only two districts (Gog and Abobo of Gambella region) in Ethiopia, the presence of hard to reach communities and lack of safe water sources in remote non-village areas, a large refugee influx, and animal infections with an unknown role in transmission of dracunculiasis, remain significant challenges for guinea worm disease elimination in Ethiopia.In Ethiopia, only the region of Gambella remains endemic for the disease. Current human cases are reported from Gog district in this region. In Gog and Abobo districts of the Gambella region, a low-level transmission of guinea worm among dogs and peri-domestic baboons is being reported. Hence, communities living in the area are at higher risk of contracting the disease.The potential for the international spread is low. However, as a result of the regular cross-border population movement between Ethiopia and South Sudan, due to insecurity in South Sudan and activities of nomadic pastoralists, the risk of spreading Guinea worm disease between the two countries always remains high.Within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, health systems are strained worldwide due to the rapidly increasing demand of services for the management of this disease and other existing ones. Support from The Carter Center and WHO has reinforced active surveillance in all the communities of Gog and Abobo districts including those living in cross-border areas, particularly in and around refugee camps, to prevent any spread of the disease to South Sudan.There is no vaccine to prevent the disease, nor is there any medication to treat patients. Prevention is possible, as successful implementation of preventive strategies have driven the disease to the verge of eradication. Prevention strategies include:Currently they are only five countries with indigenous transmission of the disease: Angola, Chad, Ethiopia, Mali2 and South Sudan. Each country has its own national Guinea Worm Eradication Program.After claiming interruption of transmission, endemic countries must show and document evidence of absence of indigenous transmission of guinea worm disease for at least three consecutive years to be eligible for consideration by the International Commission for the Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication (ICCDE). The ICCDE decides, after satisfactory deliberation, whether or not to recommend the country for certification by the World Health Organization as free of guinea worm transmission.WHO, Dracunculiasis (guinea-worm disease) fact sheetWHO, Dracunculiasis eradicationThe Carter Center, Guinea Worm Case TotalsThe Carter Center, Guinea worm outbreak in Ethiopia in 2017CDC Parasites - Guinea WormElimination of Guinea Worm Disease in Ethiopia; Current Status of the Disease’s, Eradication Strategies and Challenges to the End GameWHO guidance document - COVID-19: Operational guidance for maintaining essential health services during an outbreak1WHO requirement: All worm specimens should be obtained from each case for laboratory confirmation and sent to the WHO Collaborating Center for Research, Training, and Control of Dracunculiasis at the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).2Mali has not reported human cases for four consecutive years (2016-2019) but continued to report indigenous transmission among animals.From 13 to 19 May 2020, no new cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported from North Kivu Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo (Figure 1). Since the resurgence of the outbreak on 10 April 2020, seven confirmed cases have been reported from Kasanga, Malepe and Kanzulinzuli Health Areas in Beni Health Zone. Of these, two cases who were receiving care at the ETC recovered and were discharged, and one remains in the community (status unknown). The four other people confirmed to have Ebola died, including two community deaths and two deaths in the ETC in Beni. No new cases have been reported since 27 April. The last person confirmed to have Ebola recovered and was discharged from the treatment centre on 14 May 2020. On the same day, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the launch of the 42-day countdown to the end of the outbreak. On 18 May, all 90 contacts who remained under surveillance completed their 21-day follow up.A total of 1486 people have been vaccinated in Beni and Karisimbi since 10 April 2020. To date, no definitive source of infection has been identified.From 13 to 19 May 2020, an average of 2832 alerts were reported per day, of which 2827 (over 99%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 385 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. In the past three weeks, the alert rate has improved in affected health zones. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 11 to 17 May 2020, 2869 samples were tested including 2081 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 382 swabs from community deaths; and 406 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities increased by 15% compared to the previous week.As of 19 May 2020, a total of 3462 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 145 probable cases have been reported. Of these, 2279 people died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) and 1171 survived. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers. Since the beginning of the outbreak 250 292 contacts have been registered, and since August 2018, 303 867 people (frontline workers; contacts and contacts of contacts of confirmed cases) have been vaccinated against EVD with the rVSV-ZEBOV-GP vaccine.Efforts to retrieve the missing confirmed case and investigations into the origin of the recent cluster in Beni Health Zone are still ongoing. Given the long duration and large magnitude of the Ebola outbreak in Ituri, North Kivu, and South Kivu Provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the endemicity of Ebola virus in animal reservoirs in the region, there is a risk of re-emergence of the virus leading up to the declaration of the end of the outbreak, as well as beyond. In the coming weeks and months, it is crucial to maintain a strong and robust surveillance system in order to detect, isolate, test and treat new suspected cases as early as possible, to improve outcome of potential cases, and to interrupt any new chains of transmission. Maintaining strong communication and coordination among partners, authorities and affected communities, as well as continuing support for and engagement with EVD survivors are essential in this outbreak response.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020   From 6 to 12 May 2020, no new cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) have been reported from North Kivu Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo (Figure 1). Since the resurgence of the outbreak on 10 April 2020, seven confirmed cases have been reported from Kasanga, Malepe and Kanzulinzuli Health Areas in Beni Health Zone. Of these, one is receiving care at the Beni Ebola treatment centre (ETC), one who was receiving care at the ETC recovered and was discharged, and one remains in the community, 35 days after symptom onset. Efforts to locate this individual are being undertaken to test and provide care for this person. Four of the people confirmed to have Ebola died, including two community deaths and two deaths in the ETC in Beni. So far, no definitive source of infection has been identified.As of 12 May, 90 contacts are currently under surveillance, of which 41 are high-risk contacts who had direct contact with body fluids of the last confirmed case. All contacts have exited their high-risk period (seven to 13 days after last exposure). Contacts from the previous six cases reported in April have exited their follow-up period. Of the 41 high-risk contacts, 37 have been vaccinated. A total of 1486 people have been vaccinated in Beni and Karisimbi since 10 April 2020.From 6 to 12 May 2020, an average of 2536 alerts were reported per day, of which 2524 were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 330 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. In the past three weeks, the alert rate has improved notably in Beni and Butembo sub-coordinations. From 4 to 10 May 2020, 2494 samples were tested including 1843 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 318 swabs from community deaths; and 333 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities increased by 18% compared to the previous week.As of 12 May 2020, a total of 3462 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 145 probable cases have been reported. Of these, 2279 people died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) and 1170 survived. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.The cluster of EVD cases that emerged in April highlights the importance of heightened vigilance for the response in the face of significant challenges around community engagement, access to affected areas, ongoing insecurity issues, and limited response capacity due to other local and global emergencies. The origin of this recent chain of transmission should continue to be investigated in order to prepare for similar events in the future. It is crucial to detect, isolate, test and treat new suspected cases as early as possible to improve the chances of survival of the people affected, and to break the chain of transmission. Strong coordination and communication among partners, authorities and affected communities is essential, as well as continued support for and engagement with EVD survivors. For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020 WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information regarding this EVD outbreak. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this EVD outbreak. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.A total of 1486 people have been vaccinated in Beni and Karisimbi since 10 April 2020. To date, no definitive source of infection has been identified.From 13 to 19 May 2020, an average of 2832 alerts were reported per day, of which 2827 (over 99%) were investigated within 24 hours. Of these, an average of 385 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. In the past three weeks, the alert rate has improved in affected health zones. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 11 to 17 May 2020, 2869 samples were tested including 2081 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 382 swabs from community deaths; and 406 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities increased by 15% compared to the previous week.As of 19 May 2020, a total of 3462 EVD cases, including 3317 confirmed and 145 probable cases have been reported. Of these, 2279 people died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) and 1171 survived. Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1970) were female, 29% (n=1002) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers. Since the beginning of the outbreak 250 292 contacts have been registered, and since August 2018, 303 867 people (frontline workers; contacts and contacts of contacts of confirmed cases) have been vaccinated against EVD with the rVSV-ZEBOV-GP vaccine.Efforts to retrieve the missing confirmed case and investigations into the origin of the recent cluster in Beni Health Zone are still ongoing. Given the long duration and large magnitude of the Ebola outbreak in Ituri, North Kivu, and South Kivu Provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the endemicity of Ebola virus in animal reservoirs in the region, there is a risk of re-emergence of the virus leading up to the declaration of the end of the outbreak, as well as beyond. In the coming weeks and months, it is crucial to maintain a strong and robust surveillance system in order to detect, isolate, test and treat new suspected cases as early as possible, to improve outcome of potential cases, and to interrupt any new chains of transmission. Maintaining strong communication and coordination among partners, authorities and affected communities, as well as continuing support for and engagement with EVD survivors are essential in this outbreak response.*Excludes n=74/3462 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information regarding this EVD outbreak. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this EVD outbreak. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  The outbreak was identified when suspected measles cases had been reported by the local residents in the surrounding areas, highlighting pockets of under-vaccinated populations. According to WHO/UNICEF 2018 estimates, measles first dose vaccination coverage is relatively high (88%), and slightly lower for the second dose (77%). However, this does not reflect the vaccination coverage of incoming refugees.As of 27 April 2020, 857 confirmed measles cases have been notified from four districts, including: Cibitoke (624 cases), Butezi (221 cases), Cankuzo (6 cases) and South Bujumbura (6 cases). Of the measles cases in Cibitoke, 601 cases were epidemiologically linked, 20 cases were laboratory confirmed, and three were clinically diagnosed. In Butezi district, 27 were laboratory confirmed, 192 were epidemiologically linked, and two were clinically diagnosed. In Cankuzo, all six cases were laboratory-confirmed, whereas in the district of South Bujumbura three were laboratory confirmed and three were epidemiologically linked. Children aged 9 to 59 months were the most affected age group, with 80% of cases in children aged 9 years or younger.No new cases have been reported in South district of Bujumbura and Cankuzo since December 2019. The last cases were reported in Butezi on 2 March 2020.The outbreak in Cibitoke is ongoing. The last case in the Transit camp of Cishemere was reported on 14 January 2020). Globally, the total cases reported in Cishemere Transit Camp and Cibitoke health district are 67 and 557 respectively.Measles circulation in a population with low immunity is the cause of this outbreak. The majority of cases (77%) were either unvaccinated or unsure of their vaccination status.The Ministry of Public Health of Burundi, with partners including WHO, UNICEF, Doctors Without Borders (MSF) and Gruppo di Volontariato Civile (GVC), have developed a comprehensive measles outbreak response plan which includes the following public health measures: WHO estimates that the current measles epidemic represents a high risk for Burundi for the following reasons:In addition to low immunity, gaps in measles-rubella surveillance in the country, confirmed by the 2019 measles risk analysis, showed that 63% of districts (29/46 health districts) were at high risk, including 13 districts at very high-risk of measles outbreak. This shows that the country's surveillance system might not be able to detect outbreaks of measles if it is not strengthened. Measles is a vaccine-preventable disease and two doses of MCV are recommended to ensure immunity. Conducting targeted reactive vaccination campaigns and strengthening routine vaccination are essential for effective control of the epidemic. The administration of Vitamin A, particularly in the context of malnutrition, can reduce morbidity and mortality from measles.WHO urges all Member States to:WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to the Burundi based on the information available on the current outbreak.  The link below provides details of the 15 reported cases.20200429_mers_saudi_arabiaSince 2012 until 31 March 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2553 with 876 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedaries, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV is more severe in infected people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. Since the resurgence of the outbreak on 10 April 2020, seven confirmed cases have been reported, all from Beni Health Zone. Of these, one is receiving care at the Beni Ebola treatment centre (ETC), one who was receiving care at the ETC recovered and was discharged, and one remains in the community. Response teams are engaging with the community in order to try to bring that person to the ETC for access to treatment and supportive care, and to prevent further transmission in the community. Four of the people confirmed to have Ebola died, including two community deaths and two deaths in the ETC in Beni.Specimens from all confirmed cases were sent to the Institut Research Biomédicale (INRB) for genetic sequencing to support surveillance teams in investigating the source of infection. Laboratory sequencing of the virus showed that six out of seven cases were linked to the same chain confirmed in July 2019, suggesting exposure to a persistent source of infection. Individuals in the current cluster may have been infected by direct contact with body fluids of a survivor (asymptomatic or relapse case). Investigations into the transmission chains from July 2019 in Beni and Katwa Health Zones and the confirmed cases reported in April 2020 are ongoing in order to identify the origin of the current cluster of EVD cases.Surveillance performances have improved compared to last week, although alert rates remain suboptimal. A total of 970 contacts of the seven recent confirmed cases have been registered; among these contacts, 897 (92%) were followed and 726 (75%) were vaccinated. Of the 970 contacts, 382 (40%) were high risk contacts (direct contact with body fluids of confirmed cases). As of 28 April 2020, 57 (15%) of the 382 high risk contacts of confirmed cases have been offered accommodation in a dedicated facility where they are provided with food and other essential goods, to allow for closer monitoring and prompt isolation and provision of care to those who might become symptomatic.From 22 to 28 April 2020, an average of 2152 alerts were reported and investigated per day. Of these, an average of 230 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from eight laboratories. From 20 to 26 April 2020, 1544 samples were tested including 961 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 285 swabs from community deaths; and 298 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities increased by 50% compared to the previous week.As of 28 April 2020, a total of 3462 EVD cases, including 3316 confirmed and 145 probable cases have been reported, of which 2279 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1961) were female, 29% (n=996) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers. As of 28 April, a total of 1170 cases have recovered from EVD.Response teams face a number of challenges, including limited response resources because of other local and global emergencies, and the presence of armed groups which limits access to some communities. It is essential to detect, isolate, test and treat new suspected cases as early as possible in order to improve outcome of cases and break the chain of transmission. A major funding gap is also constraining the response; WHO currently requires US$21.5 million to ensure continuity of essential response activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Excludes n=88/3461 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020 WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information regarding this EVD outbreak. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this EVD outbreak. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For more information, please see: Of the 124 confirmed cases, 105 were in Mexico City, 18 in Mexico State, and one in Campeche State; the following is a summary of the epidemiological situation in each:In Mexico City, 427 probable cases were reported, of which 105 were laboratory confirmed and 83 remain under investigation. Confirmed cases have been reported in 14 town halls including Gustavo A. Madero (53 cases), Miguel Hidalgo (14 cases), Iztapalapa (9 cases), Cuajimalpa de Morelos (8 cases), Alvaro Obregon (7 cases), Xochimilco (4 cases), Cuauhtémoc (2 cases), Tlahuac (2 cases), Tlalpan (2 cases), Coyoacán (1 case), Azcapotzalco (1 case), Milpa Alta (1 case), and Venustiano Carranza (1 case). All 105 confirmed cases in Mexico City were Mexican citizens, and 60% were male. The highest proportion of confirmed cases were aged between 20 to 29 years (28%), followed by 2 to 9-year-old (17%), 30 to 39-year-old (14%), one-year-old (11%), infants aged less than 12 months (11%), 10 to 19-year-old (10%), and 40 years or above (9%). Of the confirmed cases, only 15 (14%) had a proven2 history of vaccination. Under vaccination may be linked with missed opportunities for vaccination, a lack of access to vaccination services, scheduling limitations impacting parent’s abilities to take their children to get vaccinated, or lack of vaccine stocks. The most recent confirmed case had rash onset on 2 April 2020 and was reported in the Gustavo A. Madero town hall.In Mexico State, 162 probable cases were reported, of which 18 were laboratory confirmed and 65 remain under investigation. Confirmed cases were reported in eight municipalities of Mexico State including Tlalnepantla (5 cases), Ecatepec de Morelos (4 cases), Nezahualcóyotl (2 cases), Tecámac (2 cases), Toluca (2 cases), Atizapán de Zaragoza (1 case), Chimalhuacán (1 case), Naucalpan (1 case). These 18 confirmed cases were all Mexican citizens, and 56% were male. The highest proportion of confirmed cases was reported among 20 to 29-year-old (22%), followed by 1-year-old (17%), 2 to 9-year-old (17%), 30 to 39-year-old (17%), infants aged less than 12 months (11%), 10 to 19-year-old (11%) and 40-year-old or above (5%). Of the confirmed cases, three cases (33%) had proven history of vaccination. The most recent confirmed case in the State of Mexico had rash onset on 27 March and lives in the Tlalnepantla de Baz municipality.In Campeche State, eight probable cases were reported, of which one was confirmed and seven remains under investigation. The confirmed case is a 5-year-old female resident of Champoton Municipality who had rash onset on 21 March 2020. The case has a proven history of vaccination. The probable place of exposure was Mérida City, Yucatán State.The rash onset dates of the confirmed cases in Mexico were between 12 February and 2 April 2020. The Figure 1 shows the progression of the outbreak. An exponential increase of confirmed cases could be observed in the coming weeks.Source: Data published by the Secretary of Health of Mexico and reproduced by PAHO/WHO.The WHO Region of the Americas was declared free of measles in September 2016. However, Venezuela and Brazil lost their ‘measles-free’ status on 1 July 2018 and 19 February 2019 respectively due to major measles outbreaks between 2018 and 2019. Of 35 Member States, 33 have maintained the ‘measles-free’ status. In 2019, 14 countries in the Region of the Americas reported confirmed cases of measles including Brazil (19,326 cases, including 15 deaths), the United States of America (1,282 cases), Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (548 cases, including 3 deaths), Colombia (242 cases, including 1 death), Canada (113 cases), Argentina (107 cases), Mexico (20 cases), Chile (11 cases), Costa Rica (10 cases), Uruguay (9 cases), Bahamas (3 cases), Peru (2 cases), Cuba (1 case), and St. Lucia (1 case). Between 1 January and 4 April 2020, seven countries have reported confirmed measles cases including Brazil (2,194 cases, 4 deaths), Mexico (124 cases), Argentina (54 cases, 1 death), the United States of America (12 cases), Uruguay (2 cases), Chile (2 cases), and Canada (1 case).Actions implemented by the Health authorities include: Measles is a highly contagious viral disease which affects susceptible individuals of all ages and remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally, despite the availability of safe and effective measles-containing vaccines. The mode of transmission is airborne or via droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat of infected persons. Initial symptoms, which usually appear 10–12 days after infection, include high fever, usually accompanied by one of several of the following: runny nose, bloodshot eyes, cough, and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. Several days later, a rash develops, usually starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreads downwards. A patient is infectious four days before the start of the rash to four days after the appearance of the rash. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2–3 weeks.Among malnourished children and people with greater susceptibility, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, and pneumonia. Measles can be prevented by immunization. In countries with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.Because of ongoing transmission, vaccination strategies and other actions are being implemented to control the outbreak by local and state level authorities in Mexico. There is a high risk of spreading of the virus due to high population density such as Mexico City, in which the high vaccination coverage could allow slow but steady transmission. At the regional level, the potential impact is considered moderate given the performance of routine immunization programs and prevention and control capacities in other countries in the region and the restrictions for travel in many countries and territories of the Region due to the pandemic of COVID-19.Due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, there might be a risk of disruption to routine immunization activities due to both COVID-19 related burden on the health system and decreased demand for vaccination because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services, even for brief periods, can result in increased numbers of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs) such as measles. Since 1 September 2017, the Pan American Health Organization WHO Regional Office of the Americas (PAHO/WHO) has been sharing information on these outbreaks with its Member States and has alerted of the risk of outbreaks occurring from imported measles cases, as well as of the possibility of re-introduction of the disease in areas with low vaccination coverage. In light of continuous reports of imported measles cases from other Regions and ongoing outbreaks in the Americas, PAHO / WHO urges all Member States to follow the new recommendations on the Guidance for Immunization in the context of the COVID-19 settings.Among the recommendations for countries with measles outbreaks, the following are highlighted:  1Mexico probable measles/rubella case definition: Any person of any age with fever and maculopapular rash, and one or more of the following signs and symptoms: cough, coryza, conjunctivitis, or adenomegaly (retroauricular, occipital, or cervical). Available here.2Verified in the immunization record card.  For more information on measles: In total, six cases have been reported since 10 April, four of whom have passed away; two in the community and two in an Ebola treatment centre (ETC). Currently, there is one confirmed case receiving care at an ETC and one who remains in the community; response teams are engaging with the community in order to try to bring the person to the ETC for access to treatment and supportive care, and to prevent further transmission in the community.Prior to the emergence of this cluster in Beni, the last person confirmed to have EVD tested negative twice and was discharged from a treatment centre on 3 March 2020. As of 21 April, a total of 762 contacts of these cases have been registered, of which 603 (79%) were followed.Specimens from all six confirmed cases were sent to the Institut Research Biomédicale (INRB) for genetic sequencing to support surveillance teams in investigating the source of infection and to determine if cases were linked to a known chain of transmission. Laboratory sequencing of the virus showed a link to cases that were confirmed in July 2019, suggesting exposure to a persistent source of infection. Therefore, individuals in the current cluster may have been infected by direct contact with body fluids of a survivor (asymptomatic or relapse case). Investigations into the transmission chains from July 2019 in Beni and Katwa Health Zones, as well as confirmed cases reported in April 2020 are ongoing.From 15 to 21 April 2020, an average of 2037 alerts were reported and investigated per day. Of these, an average of 196 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. Though the alert rate increased slightly in the past week, it remains at a suboptimal level as teams are pulled into other emergencies, including COVID-19. Response teams also face other challenges, such as the presence of armed groups and limited access to some communities.Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from nine laboratories. From 13 to 19 April 2020, 1030 samples were tested including 583 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 267 swabs from community deaths; and 180 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities increased by 6% compared to the previous week.As of 21 April 2020, a total of 3461 EVD cases, including 3316 confirmed and 145 probable cases have been reported, of which 2279 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1943) were female, 28% (n=983) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers. As of 21 April, a total of 1169 cases have recovered from EVD.An urgent injection of US $20 million is required to ensure that response teams have the capacity to maintain the appropriate level of operations through to the beginning of May 2020. More information: End in sight, but flare-ups likely in the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.*Excludes n=130/3461 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information regarding this EVD outbreak. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to this EVD outbreak. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For more information, please see: Health authorities in Mayotte have implemented the following measures: Mayotte Island is part of the Comoros archipelago (Mozambique Channel, southwestern Indian Ocean), which is under French administration. Since 2019, only circulation of DENV-1 has been established in Mayotte. However, epidemics caused by other serotypes are currently underway in the Indian Ocean area, making it possible for another serotype to be introduced to Mayotte. A shift in the predominant DENV serotype may result in more severe secondary dengue virus infections and severe dengue cases requiring hospitalization and good case management. A comprehensive risk communication should be developed.Due to the presence and sufficient density of the competent vectors (Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti), hot and humid climate, and the current rainy season (tropical maritime climate with a hot rainy season from November to May), further upsurge in cases cannot be ruled out.Responding to the dengue outbreak in Mayotte might be challenging due to the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) situation and overwhelmed health care facilities. As of 18 April 2020, Mayotte reported 263 confirmed cases of COVID-19. Furthermore, it is possible that some of the population, might have difficulty accessing the health system. The population in Mayotte is young but includes vulnerable populations, such as economically disadvantaged people, racial and ethnic minorities, those who are uninsured, and individuals with chronic health conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, who often encounter barriers to accessing healthcare services.Mayotte only has one hospital and 16 beds in the intensive care unit, and recourse to traditional medicine is also frequent. Additionally, underreporting of dengue cases cannot be excluded. There is no specific treatment for dengue. However, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe cases of dengue, and appropriate early case management are key elements of care to prevent deaths due to dengue. A delay in seeking medical care in severe dengue cases is often related to deaths from dengue virus disease. Outer islands should refer cases or seek help as early as possible.Additionally, Integrated Vector Management (IVM) activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should include both larval and adult vector control strategies (i.e. environmental management and source reduction and chemical control measures). Vector control measures should be implemented at households, places of work, schools, and healthcare facilities, among others, to prevent vector-person contact.Given that Aedes mosquitoes, the competent vector, has greater activity during the day, personal protection measures are recommended, such as wearing protective clothing that minimizes skin exposure and using repellents that can be applied to exposed skin or clothes strictly as instructed on the label. Window and door screens, and mosquito nets (impregnated or not with insecticide) can be useful to reduce vector-person contact in closed spaces during the day or night.Community supported source reduction measures should be initiated, and vector surveillance and control implemented. During lockdown situations due to COVID-19, households should be encouraged to work together in and around their homes to remove stagnant water, reduce solid wastes and to ensure proper covering of all water storage containers. This can be done as a weekly family activity and will help lower the density of mosquitoes.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to Mayotte on the basis of the information available on this outbreak. In response to the positive RT-PCR results, the EPHI and Ministry of Health performed an in-depth investigation and response, supported by partners including WHO.As of 6 April 2020, a total of 85 suspected cases have been notified from 6 kebeles in Enor Ener Woreda, of which 54 were reported from Wedesha kebele. Among the total suspected cases, 6 samples tested positive at EPHI national laboratory and they have been referred to UVRI for confirmation.  The risk at national level is assessed as high. The current outbreak in Gurage Zone, SNNP region shows rapid amplification of a yellow fever outbreak in a rural area. In the context of virtually no population immunity, the high number of suspect cases reported over a short time period is of high concern. The recent confirmation of the outbreak in cases with no history of travel is a concern. This is an indication of the existence of conducive factors for an increased incidence of yellow fever transmission and the spread of the disease beyond the hotspot areas.Recent entomological studies, in addition to previous entomological studies conducted in 2018, have indicated the presence of competent vectors including Aedes species and the potential for spread to surrounding zones. The onset of the rainy season could increase density of mosquito vectors, thereby further exacerbating risk of spread.Travellers returning to Ethiopia who may be infected with possible high levels of the virus in the blood may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.The last yellow fever outbreak occurred in the SNNP region in August 2018, with a total of 35 cases (30 suspected and 5 confirmed cases) reported from the Wolayita Zone in the SNNP region, Ethiopia. While immunization took place in selected aspects of Wolayita Zone, the communities in Gurage zone remain vulnerable to yellow fever infection.There is currently a low risk at the regional level due to limited population movement both nationally and internationally because of COVID-19 related controls on borders (air/land).WHO assesses the overall risk to be low at the global level. Ethiopia is a high priority country for the Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemic (EYE) strategy. Introduction of yellow fever vaccination into routine immunization is planned for 2020. Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. WHO and partners will continue to support local authorities to implement these interventions to control the current outbreak.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers 9 months of age or older going to Ethiopia. Ethiopia also requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate for travellers aged 9 months or older arriving from countries with risk of yellow fever transmission and for travellers having transited for more than 12 hours through an airport of a country with risk of yellow fever transmission. WHO does not generally recommend vaccination for travellers whose itineraries are limited to Afar and Somali provinces.Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. In accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005), third edition, the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends to the life of the person vaccinated. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO encourage its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should also be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if experiencing signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection.WHO has published guiding principles for immunization activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and is currently developing specific operational guidance for conducting mass vaccination campaigns in the COVID-19 context. When conditions permit, the EYE Strategy will support rapid resumption of preventive YF activities according to WHO guidance.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Ethiopia on the basis of the information available on this outbreak. The investigation was mounted in response to the recently declared outbreak in bordering Moyo district, Uganda. During the investigation, the team collected 41 blood samples from five villages which were in close proximity to the bordering Moyo district, Uganda. Of the 41 individuals whose samples were collected, nine (22%) had history of fever, but none had history of jaundice. The individuals represented a spectrum of occupations typical for the area (farming, forestry, homemaker, soldier). Most of the individuals investigated were between 20-45 years of age, and 18 (44%) of these individuals were female.In addition, a rapid entomology survey in the villages found evidence of multiple mosquito breeding sites and abundant Aedes species mosquitos (e.g. Aegypti , Albopictus, Simpsoni).As of 28 March 2020, these are the only two cases (no deaths) that have been confirmed from Kajo Keji county.South Sudan has experienced several yellow fever outbreaks in the past. The last outbreak was declared on 29 November 2018, in Sakure payam, Nzara County, Gbudue State (present Western Equatoria State) when three laboratory confirmed cases with no associated deaths were reported. To respond to the outbreak, a targeted reactive vaccination campaign was mounted in the affected area. Prior to this outbreak, in May 2003, a total of 178 cases with 27 deaths were reported in Imatong region, Torit Country, South Sudan. A reactive vaccination campaign was mounted to respond to the outbreak in 2003. Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes and has the potential to spread rapidly and cause serious public health impact. Vaccination is the most important means of preventing the infection, which provides immunity for life.The risk of ongoing and further transmission of yellow fever is concerning in South Sudan due to :Close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing is needed.Based on available information, WHO assesses the overall risk to be high at the national level and regional level. South Sudan is classified as a high-risk country in the “Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics” (EYE) initiative. Epidemic spread of Yellow Fever is a risk in South Sudan as the estimated overall population immunity is negligible with nearly 0% immunity in Kajo Keji County.Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever and provides immunity for life. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. The country plans to introduce Yellow Fever vaccination into the routine immunization program and complete preventive mass vaccination activities to rapidly boost population immunity. Expedited planning and implementation of these activities to protect the population will help avert risk of future outbreaks.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers aged 9 months and above going to South Sudan as there is evidence of persistent or periodic yellow fever virus transmission. Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. However, yellow fever vaccination is not recommended for infants aged 6 to 8 months, except during epidemics when the risk of yellow fever virus transmission may be very high. The risks and benefits of vaccination in this age group should be carefully considered before vaccination. The vaccine should be used with caution during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, pregnant or breastfeeding women may be vaccinated during epidemics or if travel to a country or area with risk of transmission is unavoidable. South Sudan also requires, as a condition of entry, a valid yellow fever vaccination certificate for travellers aged 9 months and above.In accordance with the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), Third Edition, the validity of the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever extends throughout the life of the person vaccinated. The International Certificate of Vaccination becomes valid 10 days after vaccination. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO encourage its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. As a general precaution, WHO also recommends avoidance of mosquito bites. The highest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Travelers returning to South Sudan who may be infected with possible high levels of the virus in the blood may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where the competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Republic of South Sudan on the basis of the information available on this outbreak.  Specimens from all confirmed cases were sent to the Institut de Recherche Biomedicale (INRB) in Katwa and in Kinshasa for genetic sequencing in order to support surveillance teams in the investigation of the source of infection and to determine whether these cases were linked to a known chain of transmission. A total of 332 contacts of these cases have been registered, 248 of whom were followed on 14 April 2020, and 200 of whom were vaccinated by three vaccination teams that have been activated. While approximately 6,000 doses are available in Beni Health Zone, WHO anticipates potential challenges with the vaccine pipeline due to limited flight ability as a result of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.From 8 to 14 April 2020, an average of 2015 alerts were reported and investigated per day. Of these, an average of 177 alerts were validated as suspected cases each day, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. The alert rate has decreased for the past three weeks as teams are pulled into other emergencies, including COVID-19. Other challenges include the presence of armed groups and limited access to some affected health areas, movement of contacts, and possible under-reporting to the central coordination of the outbreak response. Timely testing of suspected cases continues to be provided from 11 laboratories. From 6 to 12 April 2020, 968 samples were tested including 466 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 274 swabs from community deaths; and 228 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activities decreased by 28% compared to the previous week.On 9 April 2020, two new probable cases, with onset of symptoms in November 2019 and December 2019, were retrospectively validated. As of 14 April 2020, a total of 3458 EVD cases were reported from 29 health zones (Table 1), including 3313 confirmed and 145 probable cases, of which 2277 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1943) were female, 28% (n=982) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.An urgent injection of US $20 million is required to ensure that response teams have the capacity to maintain the appropriate level of operations through to the beginning of May 2020. More information is available from End in sight, but flare-ups likely in the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.The new confirmed cases 40 days after the last person tested negative and was discharged from care are not unexpected. The WHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the EVD outbreak includes a 42-day waiting period because undetected chains of transmission or new flare-ups may arise. The sequencing analysis will be critical to inform the investigation of the source of infection and to help detect any missed cases in the chain of transmission that led to this cluster. It is essential to remain vigilant and maintain enhanced surveillance, rapid detection and response capacities, as well as continue to engage community leaders to address or mitigate community mistrust in affected areas.*Excludes n=130/3458 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: On 14 April 2020, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from High to Moderate at the national and regional levels, while the risk level remained Low at the global level. The risk assessment will be continuously reassessed in the coming days based on available and shared information.For further information, please see the Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee for Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 14 April 2020   No new cases have been reported in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 17 February 2020 (Figure 1). While this is a positive development, there remains a sustained risk of re-emergence of EVD given the current challenges related to limited resources amidst other local and global emergencies, continued insecurity and population displacement in previous hotspots, and limited access to some affected communities. Therefore, it is critical to maintain surveillance and response operations in the period leading up to the declaration of the end of the outbreak, as well as after the declaration – as outlined in the WHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the EVD outbreak.Ongoing outbreak response efforts continue, which include investigating and validating new alert cases, supporting appropriate care and rapid diagnosis of suspected cases (which continue to be detected), supporting survivors through a multi-disciplinary programme, and strategically transitioning activities. From 1 to 7 April, an average of 2208 alerts were reported and investigated daily, which was more than a 50% decrease in the number of alerts reported in affected health zones in the previous two weeks. Of these alerts, 175 were validated as suspected cases, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. From 30 March to 5 April, 1347 samples were tested including: 645 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 318 swabs from community deaths; and 384 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activity decreased by 43% compared to the prior week.As of 7 April 2020, a total of 3453 EVD cases were reported from 29 health zones (Table 1), including 3310 confirmed and 143 probable cases, of which 2273 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1935) were female, 29% (n=979) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.An urgent injection of US $20 million is required to ensure that response teams have the capacity to maintain the appropriate level of operations through to the beginning of May 2020. For more information, please see this statement.*Excludes n=149 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Other health zones’ indicate health zones other than Kalunguta, Mandima, Mabalako, Beni, Katwa and Butembo Health Zones which have been affected by EVD.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  The link below provides details of the 18 reported cases.Since 2012 until 29 February 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2538 with 871 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Since 2012 until 29 February 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2538 with 871 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedaries, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. It is therefore critical to maintain surveillance and response operations in the period leading up to the declaration of the end of the outbreak, as well as after the declaration – as outlined in the WHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the EVD outbreak.Ongoing outbreak response efforts continue, which include investigating and validating new alert cases, supporting appropriate care and rapid diagnosis of suspected cases (which continue to be detected), supporting survivors through a multi-disciplinary programme, and strategically transitioning activities. From 24 to 31 March, an average of 4082 alerts were reported and investigated daily. Of these alerts, 274 were validated as suspected cases, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. From 23 to 29 March, 2376 samples were tested including: 1322 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 365 swabs from community deaths; and 689 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activity decreased by 14% compared to the prior week.As of 31 March 2020, a total of 3453 EVD cases were reported from 29 health zones (Table 1), including 3310 confirmed and 143 probable cases, of which 2273 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1935) were female, 28% (n=979) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.An urgent injection of US $20 million is required to ensure that response teams have the capacity to maintain the appropriate level of operations through to the beginning of May 2020. If no new resources are received, WHO risks running out of funds for the Ebola response before the end of the outbreak. For more information, please see this statement.*Excludes n=149 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain high, while global risk levels remain low.WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  No new cases have been reported in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 17 February 2020 (Figure 1). However, due to challenges related to continued insecurity and population displacement in previous hotspots, limited access to some affected communities, and potential shortages of resources amidst other local and global emergencies, there remains a high risk of re-emergence of the virus. Therefore, it is critical to maintain surveillance and response operations in the period leading up to the declaration of the end of the outbreak, as well as after the declaration – as outlined in the  WHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the EVD outbreak.Active outbreak response activities continue, which include investigating and validating new alert cases, supporting appropriate care and rapid diagnosis of suspected cases (which continue to be detected), supporting survivors through a multi-disciplinary programme, and strategically transitioning activities. From 18 to 24 March, an average of 4619 alerts were reported and investigated daily. Of these alerts, 358 were validated as suspected cases, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. From 16 to 22 March, 2747 samples were tested including: 1479 blood samples from alive, suspected cases; 374 swabs from community deaths; and 894 samples from re-tested patients. Overall, laboratory activity was conducted at similar levels as compared to the prior week.Last week, nine historical probable cases were validated, whose dates of symptom onset were between October 2018 and July 2019, bringing the cumulative number of probable cases to 143. Further historical probable cases are expected to be validated as investigations into past cases continue.As of 24 March 2020, a total of 3453 EVD cases were reported from 29 health zones (Table 1), including 3310 confirmed and 143 probable cases, of which 2273 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 57% (n=1935) were female, 29% (n=979) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.WHO has not received funding for the Ebola response since December 2019. An urgent injection of US $20 million is required to ensure that response teams have the capacity to maintain the appropriate level of operations through to the beginning of May 2020. If no new resources are received, WHO risks running out of funds for the Ebola response before the end of the outbreak. For more information, please see this  statement.*Excludes n=149 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health. For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the Congo WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There have been no new cases of Ebola virus disease (EVD) reported in the ongoing outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 17 February 2020. However, because there is still a risk of re-emergence of EVD, it is critical to maintain surveillance and response operations until and after the end of outbreak declaration – as outlined in the  WHO recommended criteria for declaring the end of the EVD outbreak.Unfortunately, the response faces increasing limitations that could result in delayed detection and control of flare-ups. These limitations include a funding shortfall, ongoing insecurity and lack of access to some areas, and limited staffing and resources amidst other local and global emergencies.No funding for the Ebola response has been received by WHO since December 2019. An urgent injection of USD 20 million is required to ensure that response teams have the capacity to maintain the appropriate level of operations through to the beginning of May 2020. If no new resources are received, WHO risks running out of funds for the Ebola response before the end of the outbreak. For more information, please see this  statement.Ongoing response activities include investigating and validating new alert cases, supporting appropriate care and rapid diagnosis of suspected cases (which continue to be detected), supporting survivors through a multi-disciplinary programme, and strategically transitioning activities. From 9 to 15 March, over 32 000 alerts were reported and investigated. Of these, 2550 alerts were validated as suspected cases, requiring specialized care and laboratory testing to rule-out EVD. During this same period, 2760 samples were tested, including 1565 blood samples from alive suspected cases, 405 swabs from community deaths, and 790 samples from re-tested patients.As of 17 March 2020, a total of 3444 EVD cases were reported from 29 health zones (Table 1), including 3310 confirmed and 134 probable cases, of which 2264 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1931) were female, 28% (n=975) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=171) were health care workers.*Excludes n=148 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. ‘Non-active zones’ indicate health zones that have not reported new cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health. For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the Congo WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 18 February 2020, the National IHR Focal Point for Qatar reported one laboratory-confirmed case of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus infection (MERS-CoV) to WHO. Details of the reported case is as follows:The case-patient is a 65-year-old male national, living in Doha. He developed cough, palpitations, dizziness, chills and rigor on 9 February, and was admitted to a hospital on the same day. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 17 February and tested positive for MERS-CoV by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (UpE and Orf1a genes) at the Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (DLMP) in Hamad Medical Corporation on 17 February. He has underlying comorbidities including diabetes, hypertension, obesity, and coronary artery disease. He is in critical condition and has been isolated in the intensive care unit. The case-patient has a history of close contact with dromedary camels in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms.Since 2012, including this case, Qatar has reported 23 human cases of MERS-CoV. From October 2012 until 5 March 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2521 with 866 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states. Upon identification, the case was isolated and infection prevention and control protocols were implemented as per WHO guidelines. Investigations and contact tracing were initiated.As of 5 March, a total of 106 contacts have been identified, including 13 household, eight occupational and 85 health care workers. All contacts of the patient were monitored daily for the appearance of respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms for a period of 14 days following their last exposure to the patient. No secondary cases were identified.All contacts of the patient tested negative for MERS-CoV.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard preventive measures when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures.Early identification, case management, and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. On 12 February 2020, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) reported an increase in the number of cases of dengue infection in French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Saint-Martin. In January 2020, health authorities in the region declared a dengue epidemic in Guadeloupe and Saint-Martin and indicated that Martinique is also at-risk of an epidemic.Dengue epidemics in these territories usually occur when there is a shift in the predominant circulating DENV serotype, and non-immune populations (e.g., tourists, new immigrants, or people not previously exposed to the circulating serotypes) are exposed to the new serotype through human movements within the territories or across neighboring countries. Local transmission occurs through the Aedes mosquito vector present on the islands and in French Guiana.From January 2019 through 17 February 2020, a total of 487 confirmed cases of dengue, with no severe cases or deaths, was reported (Figure 1). The most affected communes were Kourou, on the coastline, with 225 confirmed cases, and Maripasoula, in the south-eastern part of French Guiana with 55 confirmed cases. Except during 2017 and 2018, dengue cases have been reported every year, with the most recent largest outbreak reported in 2013, resulting in 13,240 suspected cases including 6 deaths.Laboratory tests identified DENV-1 and DENV -2 as the predominant serotypes circulating in 2019 and 2020 (as at February 17, 2020). So far in 2020, DENV-2 has accounted for 63% of reported cases.Source: Le point épidémio, Santé publique France – Cellule Guyane, 20 February 2020 and reproduced by PAHO/WHOFrom 14 October 2019 through 16 February 2020, a total of 5,840 cases of dengue, with no severe cases or deaths, was reported. Of these, more than 1,200 were confirmed by the nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen test and/or reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Forty-three percent (n = 2,540) of the total number of cases were reported since the beginning of January 2020 (Figure 2).From 19 January through 16 February 2020, clinically diagnosed cases were reported in 14 of the 24 communes with a sentinel general practitioner (out of a total of 32 communes that make up the archipelago). Most of the cases were reported in the following communes: Basse-Terre, Le Gosier, Le Moule, Petit-Canal, Petit-Bourg, Pointe-Noire, and Saint-François and the isle of Marie-Galante (eastern and central part of the main island). The most recent largest outbreak reported in Guadeloupe was in 2013, with 12,706 suspected cases including 8 deaths.Between 2005 and 2010, the predominant circulating serotypes were DENV-4 (2005), DENV-2 (2006 and 2007) and DENV-1 (2008 and 2010). In 2019, laboratory tests identified DENV-2 as the predominant dengue serotype, which is currently circulating and has been reported in all of the affected areas.Source: Le point épidémio, Santé publique France – Cellule Antilles, 20 February 2020 and reproduced by PAHO/WHOFrom July 2019 through 16 February 2020, 2,470 suspected cases of dengue and 575 cases confirmed by the NS1 antigen test and/or RT-PCR, including two severe cases and one death, were reported (Figure 3). Forty-seven percent of the suspected cases (n = 1,155) were reported since the beginning of January 2020. From 19 January through 15 February 2020, confirmed cases were reported in 18 of the 34 communes of the island. The most affected parts of the island are in the South and Central of Martinique. Results of laboratory tests indicate that DENV-2 and DENV-3 are the predominant serotypes currently circulating.In 2018, Martinique did not report any confirmed cases. The last outbreak reported in Martinique was from 2013 to 2015 with 7,040 suspected cases and no deaths reported. The outbreak was due to DENV-1 which was the predominant circulating serotype.Source: Le point épidémio, Santé publique France – Cellule Antilles, 20 February 2020 and reproduced by PAHO/WHOFrom 12 January through 16 February 2020, a total of 530 suspected cases of dengue, including one severe and fatal case, was reported. Results of laboratory tests indicate that serotypes DENV-1 and DENV-3 are currently circulating, with predominance of DENV-1.From 2002 through 2005, DENV-3 was the only serotype in circulation. Between 2006 and 2010, the predominant circulating serotypes were DENV-2 (2006, 2009) and DENV-1 (2007, 2008 and 2010) with co-circulation of DENV-3 and DENV-4. In 2013 and 2014, DENV-4 was the predominant serotype.From December 2019 through 15 February 2020, a total of 100 suspected cases of dengue, including 20 cases confirmed by NS1 antigen test and/or RT-PCR, was reported (Figure 4). Laboratory tests identified DENV-1 and DENV-2 as the circulating serotypes.The last outbreak reported in Saint-Barthélemy was from 2013 to 2014 with 970 suspected cases and one death reported. The outbreak was due to DENV-4 which was the predominant circulating serotype; with co-circulation of DENV-2. DENV-1 was identified during the 2009/2010 outbreak.Source: Le point épidémio, Santé publique France – Cellule Antilles, 20 February 2020 and reproduced by PAHO/WHOHealth authorities in French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint-Martin, and Saint-Barthélemy are implementing the following measures: The Caribbean islands have a tropical climate. There are two main seasons: a wet season from June to November and a dry season from December to May.French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint-Martin and Saint-Barthélemy have been reporting dengue cases throughout 2020; however, an increase was observed towards the end of 2019.In Guadeloupe and Martinique, cases have exceeded the seasonal threshold since October and November 2019, respectively.A shift in the predominant DENV serotype in these territories may result in more severe secondary dengue virus infections and may require comprehensive risk communications. Due to the presence of the competent vector and, given that these territories are popular tourist destinations, the risk of spread to neighboring islands and other countries cannot be ruled out.In light of the increase in dengue cases and severe dengue cases in several countries and territories of the Region of the Americas, especially in 2019, the Pan American Health Organization / World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) encourages Member States to follow key recommendations regarding outbreak preparedness and response, case management, laboratory, and integrated vector management (IVM). These recommendations are published in the 21 November 2018 PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Alert on Dengue and the 11 November 2019 PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Update on Dengue .There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue, and appropriate early case management are key elements of care to prevent patient deaths due to dengue. Deaths from dengue virus disease are often related to a delay in seeking medical care in severe dengue cases.Additionally, IVM activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should include both larval and adult vector control strategies (i.e. environmental management and source reduction and chemical control measures). Vector control measures should be implemented at households, places of work, schools, healthcare facilities, and other settings where individuals, families and communities gather to prevent vector-person contact.Aedes mosquitoes, the competent vectors, have greater activity during the day. Given this, personal protection measures are recommended such as the use of clothing that minimizes skin exposure and repellents that can be applied to exposed skin or clothes; the use of repellents must be in strict accordance with the label instructions. Window and door screens, and mosquito nets (impregnated or not with insecticide), can be useful to reduce the vector-person contact in closed spaces during the day or night. Community supported source reduction measures should be initiated, and vector surveillance and control implemented.WHO does not recommend any general travel or trade restrictions be applied based on the information available for this event.    The Central African Republic (CAR) has experienced an upsurge in measles cases as a result of outbreaks since 2019. The first case of measles was recorded in week 5 of 2019 (week commencing 28 January 2019) and the outbreak has continued through to week 7 of 2020 (week commencing 10 February 2020), with eighteen health districts affected including twelve newly affected in 2020 (Bimbo, Bégoua, Bangui I, Bangui II and Bangui III in the urban area, Bossémbélé, Bouar, Bozoum, Baboua-Abba, Haute-Kotto, Nangha-Boguila, and Ouango-Gambo in the rural area).From 1 January 2019 through 16 February 2020, a total of 7,626 suspected cases including 83 deaths (case fatality rate 1.08%) were reported. A large proportion of cases (72%) were below five years old and 18% of cases were between 5 and 10 years old. A total of 1,167 samples from suspected cases were tested at the reference laboratory of the Institut Pasteur in Bangui, of which 180 were positive for measles using Immunoglobulin M (IgM).The low vaccination coverage for routine measles vaccine over the past 5 years (below 60% for the first dose at 9 months), the absence of a second measles vaccine dose in the national immunization schedule, and inadequate follow-up campaigns resulted in a high proportion of people susceptible to measles, contributing to the ongoing epidemic. All 35 health districts are at risk of a measles outbreak, and without adequate response, the epidemic could spread through the entire country. The number of districts affected by the measles outbreak is increasing, and as of 1 March 2020, 15 health districts have been affected: Alindao, Alindao-Mingala, Baboua-Abba, Bambari, Bangui I, Bangui II, Bangui III, Bégoua, Bimbo, Bococaranga-Koui, Bossémbélé, Bouar, Bozoum, Haute-Kotto, Nangha-Boguila, Ngaoundaye, and Ouango-Gambo.In December 2019, outbreaks affected eight health districts, and the country organized local measles vaccination campaigns that targeted children aged 6 to 59 months in seven districts (Bambari, Batangafo, Bocaranga-Koui, Grimari-Kouango, Kémo, Ngaoundaye, and Nana-Gribizi). Despite vaccination coverage of more than 95%, as confirmed by the vaccination coverage survey, new cases are being recorded in these districts and neighboring health districts in children aged from 5 to 15 years old. Based on the age distribution of cases as indicated by epidemiological investigations, the proposed vaccination strategy is to target the risk group from 6 months to 10 years to help stop transmission. Since the official declaration of the outbreak by Ministry of Health on 24 January 2020, the following public health actions have been conducted: WHO estimates the overall risk for the CAR from the current measles outbreak to be “high” due to the following reasons:Risk at the regional level is assessed as moderate given the large cross border movements of populations to and from neighboring countries including Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cameroon, both for security reasons and commercial activities.The risk is considered low at the global level. Measles is a vaccine-preventable disease and two doses of measles-containing-vaccine (MCV) are recommended to ensure immunity.WHO urges all Member States to: From 1 December 2019 through 31 January 2020, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 19 additional cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 8 associated deaths. The cases were reported from Aseer (7 cases), Riyadh (6 cases), Al-Qassim (2 cases), Eastern (2 cases), Madinah (1 case), and Aljouf (1 case) regions. In January 2020, a hospital outbreak was reported in Aseer region with a cluster of 6 cases. Three of the cases were health care workers, two were patients and one was a visitor. One of the cases of this cluster died on 4 February 2020.The link below provides details of the 19 reported cases: MERS-CoV cases reported from 1 December 2019 through 31 January 2020From 2012 until 31 January 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2519 with 866 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedaries, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV causes more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and compromised immune systems. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close unprotected contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.On 7 February 2020, the Chile IHR National Focal Point informed the Pan American Health Organization / World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) of the detection of three confirmed cases of autochthonous dengue fever reported on Easter Island. The cases were diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 6 February and microbiological characterization identified the cases as serotype 2 (DENV 2 by PCR). Laboratory confirmation was performed at the national reference laboratory of the Chile Institute of Public Health on 6 February 2020.These are the first confirmed cases of dengue due to DENV 2 reported on Easter Island in 2020. The cases are females with ages ranging from 27 to 49 years. The dates of symptom onset were between 27 January to 6 February 2020. None of the cases reported any travel history.In 2000, the presence of the vector, A. aegypti, was confirmed on Easter Island. The first dengue outbreak was reported in 2002 and was due to DENV 1. In 2009, two autochthonous DENV 4 cases were detected and in 2016, 2017 and 2018, cases due to DENV 1 were reported (33, 2 and 18 cases, respectively). In 2019, a total of 38 dengue cases were reported on Easter Island (28 autochthonous DENV 1 cases, nine imported cases from Tahiti (four DENV 1 and five DENV 2 cases), and one probable autochthonous DENV 1 case). No severe dengue cases were reported in 2019.Since 2009, no other serotypes besides DENV 1 have been identified in autochthonous cases until the beginning of 2020.The density of competent vectors on Easter Island could potentially contribute to the spread of the disease throughout the island. Actions implemented by local public health authorities are as follows: Dengue fever is a febrile illness that affects infants, young children, and adults, with symptoms ranging from mild fever to high fever, with headache, pain behind the eyes, muscle and joint pain, and rash. It is transmitted by the bite of a mosquito infected with one of the four dengue virus serotypes.The introduction of serotype DENV 2 into this population, majority of which already have primary infection with DENV 1, can pose a potential risk for severe dengue cases due to secondary infections.Easter Island has a subtropical climate. The average annual temperature is 20.5°C with small variations between seasons that do not usually exceed 7°C. Summer runs from 21 December to 21 March, with January and February being the warmest months with an average maximum temperature of 28°C and minimum temperature of 15°C.Easter Island has weekly air transport connections with French Polynesia, where there is an ongoing dengue outbreak with predominantly DENV 2. Additionally, due to the presence of the competent vector and, given that Easter Island is a popular tourist destination, the risk of spread to neighboring islands and countries cannot be ruled out. In light of the increase in dengue cases and possible severe dengue cases in several countries and territories of the Region of the Americas especially in 2019, PAHO/WHO encourages Member States to follow the key recommendations regarding outbreak preparedness and response, case management, laboratory, and integrated vector management (IVM) as published in the 21 November 2018 PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Alert on Dengue and the 11 November 2019 PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Update on Dengue.There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, the timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient deaths due to dengue. A delay in seeking medical care in severe dengue cases is often related to deaths from dengue virus disease.Additionally, IVM activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should include both larval and adult vector control strategies (i.e. environmental management and source reduction and chemical control measures). Vector control measures should be implemented at households, places of work, schools, and healthcare facilities, among others, to prevent the vector-person contact.Given that Aedes mosquitoes, the competent vector, have greater activity during the day, personal protection measures are recommended such as the use of protective clothing that minimizes skin exposure and repellents that can be applied to exposed skin or clothes; the use of repellents must be in strict accordance with the label instructions. Window and door screens, and mosquito nets (impregnated or not with insecticide), can be useful to reduce the vector-person contact in closed spaces during the day or night. Community supported source reduction measures should be initiated, and vector surveillance and control implemented. From 4 November through 14 February 2020, eight laboratory confirmed cases of yellow fever in Buliisa (3), Maracha (1) and Moyo (4); including four deaths (CFR 50%), were detected through the national surveillance system.On 10 December 2019, the Ministry of Health (MoH) was notified by the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) Regional Reference Laboratory of a case of yellow fever confirmed by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The case was a 37-year-old male with suspected viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF). His occupation was cattle farming with a history of travel to trade milk between Kizikya cell, Buliisa district in Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). On 30 October 2019, he presented to hospital with symptoms of fever and headache of a five-day duration. His symptoms worsened with vomiting, abdominal pain and epistaxis and he died on 4 November 2019. During an in-depth investigation in December, eight samples were collected from close contacts, including family members and neighbours, and tested for yellow fever. On 22 January 2020, UVRI notified the MoH of a second case of yellow fever confirmed by serological testing (IgM and PRNT) in Buliisa with connection to the index case and with similar occupation. The other samples collected during investigation were negative for yellow fever.Two other confirmed cases of yellow fever were identified in Moyo district in West Nile region which shares a border with South Sudan. The cases were aged 18 and 21 years, traded timber between Uganda and South Sudan and spent time in both countries. Onset of illness for both cases was 3 January 2020 and they were admitted at a Health Center in Moyo District. They were later referred to a General Hospital with symptoms of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, fatigue, headache, abdominal and joint pains, confusion and unexplained bleeding. The cases deteriorated and died in the hospital on 5 and 6 January 2020. Results from UVRI confirmed yellow fever infection by RT-PCR performed at UVRI.Subsequently, Moyo district notified a second cluster of suspected and confirmed yellow fever infection in a different village. The confirmed case in the suspected cluster was a 59-year-old patient who presented with symptoms including unexplained bleeding and fever on 22 January and died on 23 January 2020. A blood sample collected tested positive for yellow fever by RT-PCR at UVRI. His death was preceded by the death of two of his family members in early January with similar symptoms.The Minister of Health of the Government of Uganda declared an outbreak of yellow fever on 23 January 2020.Subsequent to the declaration of an outbreak, three additional cases were confirmed in Buliisa (1), Moyo (1) and Maracha (1). Detailed investigations of these cases are ongoing.National rapid response teams have been deployed to Moyo and Buliisa districts to conduct further investigations, and initiate outbreak response. Other response activities include: enhanced surveillance and active case finding in all districts in the north-west region, and entomological surveys in the affected districts of Buliisa and Moyo. Cross-border notification with South Sudan in reference to the cases in Moyo district has been done. Investigations are ongoing in DRC and South Sudan and WHO AFRO is supporting coordination.The Ministry of Health is planning a reactive campaign, approved by the International Coordinating Group on Vaccine Provision for Yellow Fever Control. This reactive campaign will target approximately 1.7 million people to stop transmission and prevent imminent risk of the outbreak spreading in the north-west part of country particularly in Buliisa, Koboko, Maracha, Moyo and Yumbe districts. To achieve sustained protection across the country, the MoH is preparing to apply for the introduction of yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunization programme in 2021 and implementation of preventive mass vaccination campaigns nationally.Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes and has the potential to spread rapidly and cause serious public health impact. Uganda is classified as a high-risk country in the “Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics” (EYE) initiative, with history of recent outbreaks in 2019, 2018, 2016 and 2011. Epidemic spread of yellow fever is a risk in Uganda as the estimated overall population immunity is low (4.2%), and attributable to past reactive vaccination activities in focal districts that are not affected by the current outbreak.Due to the negligible population immunity in the affected districts, the detection of yellow fever cases is concerning. The affected districts share international borders with both DRC and South Sudan; and are marked by frequent population movements and high interconnectivity. Population immunity for yellow fever in the cross-border areas is also low and the forest biome between countries is continuous, indicating that there is a risk of international spread. Close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing is needed as the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries and risk of onward spreading to DRC and South Sudan cannot be completely excluded.Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of yellow fever and provides immunity for life. In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. The country plans to introduce yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunization program and complete preventive mass vaccination activities to rapidly boost population immunity. Expedited planning and implementation of these activities to protect the population will help avert risk of future outbreaks.WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers aged 9 months and above going to Uganda as there is evidence of persistent or periodic yellow fever virus transmission. Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and provides life-long protection. However yellow fever vaccination is not recommended for infants aged 6 to 8 months, except during epidemics when the risk of yellow fever virus transmission may be very high. The risks and benefits of vaccination in this age group should be carefully considered before vaccination. The vaccine should be used with caution during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, pregnant or breastfeeding women may be vaccinated during epidemics or if travel to a country or area with risk of transmission is unavoidable. Uganda also requires, as a condition of entry, a valid yellow fever vaccination certificate for travellers aged 1 year and above.In accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005) Third Edition, the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever is valid from 10 days after vaccination and throughout the life of the person vaccinated. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. As a general precaution, WHO also recommends avoidance of mosquito bites. The highest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening. Travellers should be made aware of the signs and symptoms of yellow fever and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if experiencing signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Viraemic returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present.WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to Uganda on the basis of the information available on this outbreak.During the past week, the incidence of new Ebola virus disease (EVD) cases has remained low (Figure 1). From 12 to 18 February, one new confirmed case was reported. The case was reported in Beni Health Zone, North Kivu Province and had an epidemiological link to a confirmed case reported on 5 February. As the case was alerted and transferred to an Ebola Treated Centre four days after symptom onset, there remains a risk that onward transmission to contacts may have occurred, and further cases may be expected from the currently active chain of transmission. Ebola virus may also persist in some survivors’ body fluids for several months, and in a limited number of instances, transmissions from exposure to body fluids of survivors have been documented during this outbreak. The ongoing programme for survivor care helps mitigate the risks of re-introduction events.To maintain operations and prevent re-emergence of the outbreak, WHO is requesting funding. Under the Strategic Response Plan (SRP 4.1), WHO’s financial need for the Ebola Response from January to June 2020 is US $83 million. Thanks to the generosity of many donors during 2019, WHO has some carry-over funding, which has been applied to maintain operations through February 2020. USD $40 million is currently needed to ensure continuity of response and preparedness activities to bring the case incidence to zero, and continue building strong, resilient health systems.In the past 21 days (29 January to 18 February 2020), eight confirmed cases were reported from four health areas within two active health zones in North Kivu Province (Figure 2, Table 1): Beni (n=7) and Mabalako (n=1). It has been more than 42 days since Butembo and Mambasa Health Zones reported new cases. The continued reduction of geographic spread of EVD cases and the declining trend in case incidence observed in the past 21 days are encouraging.As of 18 February, a total of 3433 EVD cases were reported, including 3310 confirmed and 123 probable cases, of which 2253 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1924) were female, 28% (n=969) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=172) of all reported cases were health care workers. Substantial case finding activities continue with more than 5000 alerts reported and investigated daily, among which, approximately 450 suspected EVD cases are detected each day who require laboratory testing and specialized care within the established Ebola treatment and transit centres.*3433 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 18 February 2020. Excludes n=161 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Non-active health zones indicate health zone that have not reported cases in the last 42 days.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the Congo WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. From 1 January through 9 February 2020, 472 laboratory confirmed cases including 70 deaths (case fatality ratio= 14.8%) have been reported in 26 out of 36 Nigerian states and the Federal Capital Territory. Of the 472 confirmed cases, 75% have been reported from three states: Edo (167 cases), Ondo (156 cases) and Ebonyi (30 cases). The other states that have reported cases include : Taraba (25), Bauchi (14), Plateau (13), Kogi (13), Delta (12), Nasarawa (4), Kano (4), Rivers (4), Enugu (4), Borno (3), Kaduna (3), Katsina (3), Benue (2), Adamawa (2), Sokoto (2), Osun (2), Abia (2), Kebbi (2), Gombe (1), Oyo (1), Anambra (1), FCT (1), and Ogun (1).Fifteen confirmed cases have been reported among health care workers with one death among a confirmed case and one among a probable case.Lassa fever is endemic in Nigeria and the annual peak of human cases is usually observed during the dry season (December–April) following the reproduction cycle of the Mastromy rats in the wet season (May – June). Given that 90-95% of human infections are due to indirect exposure to (through food or household items contaminated by infected rats’ urine and faeces) or direct contact with infected Mastomys rats, the very high density and high circulation of Lassa fever virus in young non-immune rat population during the wet season create a potential for further human infection, thus, the number of infections is expected to continue to rise until the end of the dry season.  Lassa fever is a viral haemorrhagic fever that is transmitted to humans via contact with food or household items contaminated with rodent urine or faeces. Secondary human-to-human transmission can also occur through direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other body fluids of infected persons, especially in health care settings.About 80% of persons infected with the Lassa virus are asymptomatic but in the remaining 20%, the illness manifests as a febrile illness of variable severity associated with multiple organ dysfunctions with or without haemorrhage. The overall case fatality ratio is usually between 1% and 15% among patients hospitalized with severe illness. Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment improves survival. Lassa fever is known to be endemic in Benin, Guinea, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone and Nigeria, but may exist in other West African countries.Although Nigeria is a Lassa fever endemic country and has developed capacity for managing Lassa fever outbreaks, the current overall risk is considered moderate at national level. Capacities at sub-national level remain suboptimal. Fifteen confirmed cases have been reported among healthcare workers in this outbreak and highlights the urgent need to strengthen IPC measures. Furthermore, country capacity to detect and respond to Lassa fever outbreaks needs to be improved (surveillance, laboratory, case management, coordination and IPC measures).The overall regional and global risk is considered to be low due to minimal number of suspected cross-border transmission from Nigeria to neighboring countries. Prevention of Lassa fever relies on promoting good “community hygiene” to discourage rodents from entering homes. Effective measures include storing grain and other foodstuffs in rodent-proof containers, disposing of garbage far from the home, maintaining clean households. Mastomys, an African genus of rodents are so abundant in endemic areas, it is not possible to completely eliminate them from the environment. Family members should always be careful to avoid contact with blood and body fluids while caring for sick persons.In health-care settings, staff should always apply standard infection prevention and control precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment (to block splashes or other contact with infected materials) and safe injection practices.Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Lassa fever should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the patient’s blood and body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. When in close contact (within one metre) of patients with Lassa fever, health-care workers should wear face protection (a face shield or a medical mask and goggles), a clean, non-sterile long-sleeved gown, and gloves (sterile gloves for some procedures).WHO continues to advise all countries endemic for Lassa fever on the need to enhance early detection and treatment of cases to reduce the case fatality ratio.WHO advises against any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Nigeria and the affected areas based on the currently available information.  This week, the case incidence continued to be low in the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Figure 1). From 5 to 11 February, three new confirmed cases were reported in Beni Health Zone, North Kivu Province. All three cases have epidemiological links to a transmission chain originating in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone, with possible nosocomial exposure in Beni. The most recent case reported from Beni Health Zone on 11 February was isolated one day after symptom onset. Early detection of cases reduces the probability of transmission of EVD in the community and significantly improves the clinical outcome for the patients.In the past 21 days (22 January to 11 February 2020), 12 confirmed cases, including three community deaths, were reported from four health areas within two active health zones in North Kivu Province (Figure 2, Table 1): Beni (n=11) and Mabalako (n=1). It has been 42 days since Katwa Health Zone has reported new cases. The continued reduction of geographic spread of EVD cases and the declining trend in case incidence observed in the past 21 days are encouraging; however, these improvements remain fragile and should not be interpreted as an indication that response efforts can be reduced. Continued vigilance is essential to improve infection prevention and control in health care facilities, as well as ensuring early identification and follow up of cases and contacts.As of 11 February, a total of 3432 EVD cases were reported, including 3309 confirmed and 123 probable cases, of which 2253 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1923) were female, 28% (n=968) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=172) of all reported cases were health care workers.On 12 February, the WHO Director-General reconvened the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (IHR). The Committee reviewed progress in the implementation of the Temporary Recommendations issued on 18 October 2019. Updates on the outbreak were provided by representatives of the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the UN Ebola Emergency Response Coordinator and the WHO Secretariat. The situation in neighbouring countries was reviewed, as well as preparedness in nonaffected areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was the view of the Committee that this event still constitutes a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC). Further details can be found in the Emergency Committee  Statement.On 10 February, WHO published new guidelines for healthcare providers regarding the management of pregnant and breastfeeding women in the context of Ebola virus disease. The document reviews existing evidence and provides a single set of recommendations on the care continuum for women exposed to, diagnosed with, or recovered from Ebola, and will enable healthcare providers, emergency response teams and health policy-makers to improve prevention and treatment measures in an Ebola outbreak. The news release of this guideline can be found  here. *3432 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 11 February 2020. Excludes n=163 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Non-active health zones indicate health zone that have not reported cases in the last 42 days. **Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:  Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the Congo  WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. From 29 January to 4 February four new confirmed cases were reported in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All four cases were reported in Beni Health Zone, North Kivu Province. Three cases had epidemiological links to the transmission chain which originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone, and their most likely exposure was through nosocomial infection in traditional practitioner facilities. The fourth and most recent case reported in Beni Health Zone was not a known contact at the time of detection, stayed in the community for nine days after symptom onset, and passed away in the community on 4 February. Confirmed cases who spend time in the community increase the risk of transmission of EVD to contacts. In the past 21 days (15 January to 4 February January 2020), 18 confirmed cases, including three community deaths, were reported from three health areas within two active health zones in North Kivu Province (Figure 1, Figure 2, Table 1): Beni (n=17) and Mabalako (n=1). The reduction of geographic spread of EVD cases and the declining trend in case incidence observed in the past 21 days are encouraging. In addition, monthly surveillance indicators have overall improved since October 2019. These indicators include an increase in proportion of cases registered as contacts, a decrease in the proportion of community deaths among new reported cases, a decrease in delay to isolation, and a decrease in the monthly case fatality ratio. These improvements are fragile and should not be interpreted as an indication that response efforts can be reduced. Among the 18 people confirmed with EVD in the past 21 days, nine cases were isolated and provided care three or more days after symptom onset, which increases the possibility of community transmission. The four most recent cases reported in Beni Health Zone in the past seven days were not under surveillance at the time of detection. Therefore, heightened vigilance of the response is critical, including continued identification of cases and contacts, follow up of contacts, and continuing to improve infection prevention and control in health care facilities.As of 4 February, a total of 3429 EVD cases were reported, including 3306 confirmed and 123 probable cases, of which 2251 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1920) were female, 28% (n=967) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=172) of all reported cases were health care workers. *3429 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 4 February 2020. Excludes n=169 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Alimbongo, Ariwara, Biena, Bunia, Goma, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lolwa, Lubero, Mandima, Manguredjipa, Masereka, Mutwanga, Mwenga, Nyakunde, Nyiragongo, Oicha, Pinga, Rwampara, Tchomia, and Vuhovi.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:  Ebola situation reports: Democratic Republic of the Congo WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low.WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 9 and 13 January 2020, the National IHR Focal Point of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) reported an additional two (2) laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) to WHO.The first MERS-CoV case in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) was reported in July 2013. Since then, UAE has reported 91 cases of MERS-CoV (including these cases) and 12 associated deaths. From 2012 until 15 January 2020, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2506 with 862 associated deaths. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.  Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated limited ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings. The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures. Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. From 22 to 28 January five new confirmed cases were reported in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All five cases were reported from Beni Health Zone and had epidemiological links to the transmission chain which originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone. The most likely exposure for all these cases was through nosocomial infection in traditional practitioner facilities. All of the cases were identified as contacts but were not followed up at the time of detection. One confirmed case reported on 20 January stayed in the community for four days prior to being admitted to an Ebola treatment centre (ETC) and infected two additional people in the community. These two individuals, reported on 27 January, stayed four to five days in the community while symptomatic prior to isolation. One other confirmed case stayed in the community for eight days after symptom onset and passed away in the community on 28 January. Confirmed cases who spend time in the community increase the risk of transmission of EVD to contacts. Therefore, further cases can be expected in the coming two weeks in Bundji and Kanzulinzuli Health Areas and neighbouring health areas in Beni Health Zone. In the past 21 days (8 to 28 January 2020), 28 confirmed cases were reported from five health areas within three active health zones in North Kivu Province (Figure 1, Figure 2, Table 1): Beni (n=18), Mabalako (n=9), and Musienene (n=1). Beni Health Zone remains the current hotspot of the outbreak, having reported 64% of confirmed cases in the past 21 days. As of 28 January, the following health zones marked more than 21 days without confirmed cases of EVD: Mambasa Health Zone in Ituri Province (23 days), and Butembo (25 days) Health Zone in North Kivu Province. Of the 28 people confirmed with EVD in the past 21 days, 20 were isolated and provided care within the first two days after symptom onset, which means that they have better chances of survival and are less likely to infect contacts in the community. In the past 21 days encouraging trends about the development of the outbreak have been observed. The past epidemiological week (20 to 26 January 2020) saw the smallest number of cases reported since the beginning of the response; cases have been reported in five health areas in three health zones; contact tracing performance as well as the daily number of reported alerts continue to improve over time (Figure 3, Figure 4). Contact tracing has notably improved as a result of the provision of accommodation and essential services in Beni Health Zone to known contacts who have agreed to be followed. Despite these encouraging signs, continuous vigilance is warranted in order to overcome remaining challenges. Possible nosocomial transmission linked to traditional practitioner facilities remains a major driver of the current outbreak and poses specific challenges such as contact identification. As of 28 January, a total of 3421 EVD cases were reported, including 3302 confirmed and 119 probable cases, of which 2242 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1918) were female, 28% (n=963) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=172) of all reported cases were health care workers. **3421 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 28 January 2020. Excludes n=169 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Alimbongo, Ariwara, Biena, Bunia, Goma, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lolwa, Lubero, Mandima, Manguredjipa, Masereka, Mutwanga, Mwenga, Nyakunde, Nyiragongo, Oicha, Pinga, Rwampara, Tchomia, and Vuhovi. **Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.From 22 to 28 January five new confirmed cases were reported in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All five cases were reported from Beni Health Zone and had epidemiological links to the transmission chain which originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone.  For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:  WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nine new confirmed cases were reported from 15 to 21 January in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All of the cases were reported from Beni Health Zone in North Kivu Province. Eight of the cases (8/9) were registered contacts prior to symptom onset; all nine had epidemiological links to a confirmed case. In the past 21 days (1 to 21 January 2020), 35 confirmed cases were reported from 11 health areas within five active health zones in North Kivu and Ituri Provinces (Figure 1, Figure 2, Table 1): Beni (n=14), Mabalako (n=11), Butembo (n=5), Mambasa (n=4), and Musienene (n=1). Beni and Mabalako Health Zones remain the current hotspots of the outbreak, having reported 71% of confirmed cases in the past 21 days. Of the 35 people confirmed with EVD in the past 21 days, 24 were isolated and provided care within the first two days after the onset of symptoms, meaning they have better chances of survival and are less likely to infect contacts in the community. In the past 21 days, only one confirmed EVD death occurred in the community, outside of an Ebola treatment centre.In recent weeks, contacts of confirmed cases have been offered the option of staying in supportive accommodation allocated for identified EVD contacts where they are provided with food and other essential goods. This allows for systematic daily follow-up of contacts and enables prompt isolation and provision of care to contacts that become symptomatic. As a result, the median time to isolation in the past 21 days has decreased from three days to one day (interquartile range 0-3). The number of new confirmed cases reported each week has remained stable over the past six weeks, with approximately 14 new EVD cases reported weekly. In addition, improved surveillance indicators such as the proportion of cases listed as contacts and followed prior to detection, and the decreased time to isolation of cases are encouraging signs. As of 21 January, a total of 3416 EVD cases were reported, including 3297 confirmed and 119 probable cases, of which 2238 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1912) were female, 28% (n=963) were children aged less than 18 years, and 5% (n=172) of all reported cases) were healthcare workers. As of 21 January, the current transmission chain is comprised of 82 confirmed and probable cases reported in 13 health areas in six health zones; Mabalako, Beni, Biena, Butembo, Katwa, and Musienene Health Zones. The transmission chain originated from one individual who was classified as a relapse of EVD in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone (first reported in the Disease Outbreak News published on 19 December 2019). The individual, which is the first and only case of relapse documented in this outbreak, was infected in June 2019, relapsed in November, and passed away in December. Further analyses indicate that the individual directly infected 29 people while symptomatic in the community for nine days before being isolated. Of the cases who were directly infected from this case, 11/29 were through possible nosocomial transmission. The remaining 52 cases resulted from onward transmissions. Based on available information regarding the place of exposure for cases in this transmission chain, the main drivers are individuals exposed in the community due to delays to case isolation (50%, 41/82), possible nosocomial transmission (37%, 30/82), and community deaths where cases were exposed during funerals (2%, 2/82). The estimated reproduction number (R), which is the expected number of secondary cases produced by a single infection in a susceptible population, of this transmission chain was not statistically significantly different from the overall mean R of this outbreak, likely due to the limited sample size of cases in the transmission chain which originated in Aloya Health Area. These findings reinforce the importance of early identification of cases and safe and dignified burials. *3416 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 21 January 2020. Excludes n=169 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Alimbongo, Ariwara, Bunia, Goma, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lolwa, Lubero, Mandima, Manguredjipa, Masereka, Mutwanga, Mwenga, Nyakunde, Nyiragongo, Oicha, Pinga, Rwampara, Tchomia, and Vuhovi. **Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:  WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low.WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 15 January 2020, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan (MHLW) reported an imported case of laboratory-confirmed 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) from Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.The case-patient is male, between the age of 30-39 years, living in Japan.The case-patient travelled to Wuhan, China in late December and developed fever on 3 January 2020 while staying in Wuhan. He did not visit the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market or any other live animal markets in Wuhan. He has indicated that he was in close contact with a person with pneumonia. On 6 January, he traveled back to Japan and tested negative for influenza when he visited a local clinic on the same day. On 10 January 2020, due to his continued symptoms of cough, sore throat and fever, he visited a local hospital and was found to have abnormal chest x-ray with infiltrates. He was admitted to the hospital on the same day and had remained febrile until 14 January. On 14 January, his attending doctor notified the case to a local public health authority under the surveillance system for “Unidentified Serious Infectious Illness”. Samples were collected and sent to the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID), and at NIID, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing and sequencing was performed twice, which identified very small amount of 2019-nCoV RNA on 15 January 2020. On 15 January, the case-patient was afebrile and was discharged from hospital. Currently, he is staying at home in a stable condition.  This was the second of three exported cases of novel coronavirus from Wuhan city, China. Since the initial report of cases in Wuhan city on 31 December 2019, and as of 12 January 2020, 41 laboratory-confirmed cases of nCoV infection, including 2 deaths in cases with underlying medical conditions have been reported to WHO. Two cases have been reported from Thailand. The source of the outbreak is still under investigation in Wuhan. Preliminary investigations have identified environmental samples positive for nCoV in Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan City, however some laboratory-confirmed patients did not report visiting this market. To date, there is no reported infection among healthcare workers in China, Thailand or Japan. No additional cases have been reported since 3 January in China. Additional investigations are needed to determine how the patients were infected, whether human-to-human transmission has been observed, mode(s) of transmission, the clinical spectrum of disease, and the extent of infection, including presence of subclinical cases that are undetected with current surveillance. It is critical to review all available information to fully understand the extent of transmissibility between people and likelihood of zoonotic spillover.Although the source of the novel coronavirus causing this cluster of pneumonia and the mode(s) of transmission are unknown, it would be prudent to remind populations and health workers of the basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections:Health authorities should work with travel, transport and tourism sectors to provide travellers with information to reduce the general risk of acute respiratory infections via travel health clinics, travel agencies, conveyance operators and at points of entry.WHO has provided interim guidance for novel coronaviruses. WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Japan based on the information currently available on this event.  The Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, today informed the World Health Organization (WHO) of a confirmed case of a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in a person who travelled to Wuhan, China. This is the second confirmed case of 2019-nCoV that has been detected outside of China, following confirmation of a case in Thailand on 13 January. Considering global travel patterns, additional cases in other countries are likely.Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. 2019-nCoV is a new strain that has not been previously identified in humans.Much remains to be understood about the new coronavirus, which was first identified in China earlier this month. Not enough is known about 2019-nCoV to draw definitive conclusions about how it is transmitted, clinical features of disease, or the extent to which it has spread. The source also remains unknown.WHO encourages all countries to continue preparedness activities. On 10 January, WHO published information on how to monitor for cases, treat patients, prevent onward transmission in health care facilities, maintain necessary supplies, and communicate with the public about 2019-nCoV. The information includes advice on how to maintain hand and respiratory hygiene, and safe food and market practices. WHO is developing and updating this information in consultation with networks of experts across the globe.WHO’s interim guidance and other information on coronaviruses can be found hereWHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions based on the information available. If travellers develop respiratory illness before, during or after travel, they should seek medical attention and share travel history with their health care provider.On 13 January 2020, the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), Thailand reported the first imported case of lab-confirmed novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) from Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.The case is a 61-year-old Chinese woman living in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. On 5 January 2020, she developed fever with chills, sore throat and headache. On 8 January 2020, she took a direct flight to Thailand from Wuhan City together with five family members in a tour group of 16 people. The traveler with febrile illness was detected on the same day by thermal surveillance at Suvarnabhumi Airport (BKK), Thailand, and was hospitalized the same day. After temperature check and initial assessment, she was transferred to the hospital for further investigations and treatment.The patient’s full exposure history is under investigation. She reported a history of visiting a local fresh market in Wuhan on regular basis prior to the onset of illness on 5 January 2020; however, she did not report visiting the Huanan South China Seafood Market from where most of the cases were detected. Samples tested positive for coronaviruses by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on 12 January 2020. The genomic sequencing analysis performed by Emerging Infectious Diseases Health Science Center, the Thai Red Cross Society (EID-TRC) and the Thai National Institute of Health (Thai NIH), Department of Medical Sciences confirmed that the patient was infected with the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) which was isolated in Wuhan, China (for more information, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 12 January 2020 ).As of this writing, the patient is in a stable condition and in hospital.The Ministry of Public Health Thailand implemented measures for screening travelers from Wuhan city on 3 January 2020 at Suvarnabhumi Airport, Don Mueang, Phuket and Chiang Mai airports, and activated enhanced surveillance at public and private hospitals. Since the identification of the case on 5 January 2019, Thai health authorities have taken the following measures:The Ministry of Public Health of Thailand has international-standard diagnosis and medical care, and is closely coordinating with WHO and related departments for the potential response measures. This is the first exported case of novel coronavirus from Wuhan city, China. Since the initial report of cases in Wuhan city on 31 December 2019, 41 cases have a preliminary diagnosis of 2019-nCoV infection, including 1 death in a person with severe underlying medical conditions (for more information, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 12 January 2020 ).As the traveler did not report having visited the market linked to most of the other cases, it is vital that investigations continue to identify the source of infection. To date, China has not reported any cases of infection among healthcare workers or contacts of the cases. Based on the available information there is no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission. No additional cases have been detected since 3 January 2020 in China.Additional investigation is needed to ascertain the presence of human-to-human transmission, modes of transmission, common source of exposure and the presence of asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic cases that are undetected. It is critical to review all available information to fully understand the potential transmissibility among humans. Health authorities should work with travel, transport and tourism sectors to provide travelers with information to reduce the general risk of acute respiratory infections via travel health clinics, travel agencies, conveyance operators and at points of entry.WHO has provided interim guidance for novel coronaviruses .WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Thailand based on the information currently available on this event.On 11 and 12 January 2020, WHO received further detailed information from the National Health Commission about the outbreak. WHO is reassured of the quality of the ongoing investigations and the response measures implemented in Wuhan, and the commitment to share information regularly. The evidence is highly suggestive that the outbreak is associated with exposures in one seafood market in Wuhan. The market was closed on 1 January 2020. At this stage, there is no infection among healthcare workers, and no clear evidence of human to human transmission. The Chinese authorities continue their work of intensive surveillance and follow up measures, as well as further epidemiological investigations. Among the 41 confirmed cases, there has been one death. This death occurred in a patient with serious underlying medical conditions. China shared the genetic sequence of the novel coronavirus on 12 January, which will be of great importance for other countries to use in developing specific diagnostic kits.The cluster was initially reported on 31 December 2019, when the WHO China Country Office was informed. The Chinese authorities identified a new type of coronavirus (novel coronavirus, nCoV), which was isolated on 7 January 2020. Laboratory testing was conducted on all suspected cases identified through active case finding and retrospective review. Other respiratory pathogens such as influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) were ruled out as the cause.According to information conveyed to WHO by Chinese authorities on 11 and 12 January, 41 cases with novel coronavirus infection have been preliminarily diagnosed in Wuhan City. Of the 41 cases reported, seven are severely ill. This is when the one death, mentioned above, was reported, in a patient with other underlying health conditions. Six patients have been discharged from hospital. Symptom onset of the 41 confirmed nCoV cases ranges from 8 December 2019 to 2 January 2020. No additional cases have been detected since 3 January 2020. The clinical signs and symptoms reported are mainly fever, with a few cases having difficulty in breathing, and chest radiographs showing invasive pneumonic infiltrates in both lungs. National authorities report that patients have been isolated and are receiving treatment in Wuhan medical institutions.According to the preliminary epidemiological investigation, most cases worked at or were handlers and frequent visitors to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market. The government reports that there is no clear evidence that the virus passes easily from person to person. Currently, no case with infection of this novel coronavirus has been reported elsewhere other than Wuhan. China's National Health Commission has deployed a group of experts to Wuhan City to support the local response.National authorities have reported the following response measures:WHO is closely monitoring the situation and is in regular contact with national authorities in China to provide support required. Technical guidance on novel coronavirus has been developed and will continue to be updated as additional information is available.To date, investigations are still under way to assess the full extent of the outbreak. Wuhan city is a major domestic and international transport hub. To date, there have been no reported cases outside of Wuhan City. More comprehensive information and ongoing investigations are also required to better understand the epidemiology, clinical picture, source, modes of transmission, and extent of infection; as well as the countermeasures implemented.Based on information provided by national authorities, WHO’s recommendations on public health measures and surveillance for novel coronaviruses apply. WHO does not recommend any specific health measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness either during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share travel history with their healthcare provider. Travel guidance has been updated.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on China based on the information currently available on this event.  Twelve new confirmed cases were reported from 1 to 7 January in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in North Kivu and Ituri Provinces. The confirmed cases in this week were reported from nine health areas in four health zones: Butembo (42%, n=5), Mambasa (33%, n=4), Mangina (17%, n=2), and Beni (8%, n=1). The new case reported in Beni is linked to a transmission chain that originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone. In the past 21 days (18 December 2019 to 7 January 2020), 41 confirmed cases were reported from 13 health areas within six active health zones in North Kivu and Ituri Provinces (Figure 2, Table 1): Mabalako (49%, n=20), Butembo (22%, n=9), Kalunguta (12%, n=5), Mambasa (10%, n=4), Katwa (5%, n=2), and Beni (2%, n=1). Mabalako Health Zone remains the main hotspot of the outbreak having reported 49% of confirmed cases in the past 21 days. Although the majority of the cases (76%, n=31) are linked to known chains of transmission, there are concerns around the reintroduction of the disease into health zones with dense populations which have previously been cleared, such as Butembo, Katwa, and Beni Health Zones. The sources of exposure for five new cases reported in Kalunguta Health Zone and four new cases reported in Mambasa Health Zone in the past 21 days are currently under investigation.As of 7 January, a total of 3392 EVD cases were reported, including 3274 confirmed and 118 probable cases, of which 2235 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1903) were female, 28% (n=956) were children aged less than 18 years, and 169 (5% of all reported cases) were healthcare workers.*3392 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 7 January 2020. Excludes n=173 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Alimbongo, Ariwara, Biena, Bunia, Goma, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lolwa, Lubero, Mandima, Manguredjipa, Masereka, Musienene, Mutwanga, Mwenga, Nyakunde, Nyiragongo, Oicha, Pinga, Rwampara, Tchomia, and Vuhovi. **Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low.WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.On 29 December 2019, the National IHR Focal Point of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) reported one laboratory-confirmed case of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) to WHO.The case is a 74-year-old male national who owns a camel farm located in Al Ain City, Abu Dhabi region in UAE where he is living. He developed fever, cough and sore throat on 8 December 2019 and was admitted to hospital on 10 December, then transferred to ICU on 16 December. A nasopharyngeal aspirate was collected and tested positive for MERS-CoV by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (UpE and Orf1a genes) on 16 December by the Shiekh Khalifa Medical Center laboratory. He has underlying comorbidities including hyperkalemia, diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy, heart disease, asthma and hypertension. He has a history of close contact with dromedary camels and sheep at his farm in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. He has no history of recent travel and has not been involved in slaughtering animals. Currently, the patient is in stable condition in intensive care unit isolation.Since 2012, UAE has reported 89 cases of MERS-CoV (including this case) and 12 associated deaths. From 2012 through 29 December 2019, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2494 with 858 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states. Upon identification of the patient, an incident report, case investigation and contact tracing were initiated. The investigation is ongoing and includes screening of all close contacts, including occupational contacts in his farm, household contacts and healthcare workers at the hospital where he sought care. All identified contacts of the confirmed case will be monitored daily for the appearance of respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms for 14 days after the last exposure to the confirmed case. A total of 88 contacts have been identified, including 70 health care contacts and 18 household contacts. All close contacts of the patient were tested negative for MERS-CoV. The veterinary authorities have been notified and investigations for MERS-CoV in animals are ongoing. Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated limited ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings. The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures. Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV causes more severe disease in people with underlying chronic conditions such as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and compromised immune systems. Therefore, people with these underlying conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.  On 31 December 2019, the WHO China Country Office was informed of cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology (unknown cause) detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province of China. As of 3 January 2020, a total of 44 patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology have been reported to WHO by the national authorities in China. Of the 44 cases reported, 11 are severely ill, while the remaining 33 patients are in stable condition. According to media reports, the concerned market in Wuhan was closed on 1 January 2020 for environmental sanitation and disinfection.The causal agent has not yet been identified or confirmed. On 1 January 2020, WHO requested further information from national authorities to assess the risk.National authorities report that all patients are isolated and receiving treatment in Wuhan medical institutions. The clinical signs and symptoms are mainly fever, with a few patients having difficulty in breathing, and chest radiographs showing invasive lesions of both lungs.According to the authorities, some patients were operating dealers or vendors in the Huanan Seafood market. Based on the preliminary information from the Chinese investigation team, no evidence of significant human-to-human transmission and no health care worker infections have been reported. National authorities have reported the following response measures:WHO is closely monitoring the situation and is in close contact with national authorities in China. There is limited information to determine the overall risk of this reported cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology. The reported link to a wholesale fish and live animal market could indicate an exposure link to animals. The symptoms reported among the patients are common to several respiratory diseases, and pneumonia is common in the winter season; however, the occurrence of 44 cases of pneumonia requiring hospitalization clustered in space and time should be handled prudently.Wuhan city, with a population of 19 million, is the capital city of Hubei province, with a population of 58 million people. WHO has requested further information on the laboratory tests performed and the differential diagnoses considered. Based on information provided by national authorities, WHO’s recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza and severe acute respiratory infections still apply.WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness either during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share travel history with their healthcare provider.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on China based on the current information available on this event.  Since the last disease outbreak news published on 19 December 2019, 29 new confirmed cases were reported from 18 to 31 December in the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in North Kivu province. The confirmed cases in this week were reported from eight health areas in four health zones: Mabalako (62%, n=18), Butembo (14%, n=4), Kalunguta (17%, n=5), and Katwa (7%, n=2). Three of the four cases reported in Butembo in the past 14 days are linked to a transmission chain of more than 50 people that originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone. One individual classified as a relapse case of EVD, infected several other individuals within the family and through nosocomial transmission (for more information, please see the disease outbreak news published on 19 December 2019). In Kalunguta Health Zone, the five cases reported between 24 and 28 December 2019, are a distinct epidemiologically linked chain of transmission, although the source of exposure is currently under investigation.In the past 21 days (11 December to 31 December), 40 confirmed cases were reported from 10 health areas within five neighbouring active health zones in North Kivu province (Figure 2, Table 1): Mabalako (68%, n=27), Butembo (13%, n=5), Kalunguta (13%, n=5), Katwa (5%, n=2), and Biena (3%, n=1). The majority of the cases (75%, n=30) are linked to known chains of transmission. As of 31 December, a total of 3380 EVD cases were reported, including 3262 confirmed and 118 probable cases, of which 2232 cases died (overall case fatality ratio 66%) (Table 1). Of the total confirmed and probable cases, 56% (n=1900) were female, 28% (n=953) were children aged less than 18 years, and 168 (5% of all reported cases) were healthcare workers.*3380 confirmed and probable cases, reported as of 31 December 2019. Excludes n=173 cases for whom onset dates not reported. Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Alimbongo, Ariwara, Beni, Bunia, Goma, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lolwa, Lubero, Mandima, Mambasa, Manguredjipa, Masereka, Musienene, Mutwanga, Mwenga, Nyakunde, Nyiragongo, Oicha, Pinga, Rwampara, Tchomia, and Vuhovi.**Total cases and areas affected during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further information about public health response actions by the Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low.WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. Any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for travellers to/from the affected countries. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practise good hygiene. Further information is available in the WHO recommendations for international traffic related to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. From 1 March through 8 April 2019, the National International Health Regulations (IHR) Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 45 additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, including 13 deaths. Of the 45 cases reported, nine cases, including one death, were linked to the outbreak in Wadi Aldwasir city.This Disease Outbreak News (DON) describes the 36 cases reported in Saudi Arabia, excluding the 9 cases reported in Wadi Aldwasir. Of the 36 cases, ten cases were reported in Alkhafi city and six cases in Riyadh city.The link below provides details of the 36 reported cases:A summary of the outbreak in Wadi Aldwasir is available in the DON published on 24 April 2019.From 2012 through 8 April 2019, a total of 2419 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV and 836 associated deaths were reported globally to WHO under the IHR. The associated deaths reported to WHO were identified through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high morbidity and mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with infected dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans, especially from close unprotected contact with infected patients. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of these additional cases does not change WHO’s overall risk assessment of MERS. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (e.g. consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (e.g. in a health care setting).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control (IPC) measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.WHO recommends that comprehensive identification, follow up and testing of all contacts of MERS patients be conducted, if feasible, regardless of the development of symptoms since approximately 20% of all reported MERS cases have been reported as mild or asymptomatic. The role of asymptomatic MERS-CoV infection in transmission is not well understood. However, reports of transmission from an asymptomatic MERS patient to another individual have been documented.MERS causes more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and compromised immune systems. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close unprotected contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking camel’s raw milk or camel urine or eating camel meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.From 1 January through 30 April 2019, the Ministry of Health in Tunisia responded to a large measles outbreak in the country. A total of 3 141 suspected cases, of which 909 (28.9%) were laboratory confirmed and 1 236 (39.4 %) epidemiologically linked cases including 30 deaths (case fatality ratio=1.0 %), have been reported in all of the 24 governorates (range 1 – 1 274). The majority of cases were reported from Kasserine (1 274 cases) and Sfax (212 cases) governorates. In April 2019, four additional governorates were particularly affected with 155, 116, 93 and 69 cases reported from Kairouan, Tunis, Sousse and Nabeul respectively.The two most affected age groups were those older than 15 years (31%) and infants between the age of 6 and 12 months (28%). The male: female ratio was 1.2. Eighty four percent of affected children between 1 and 5 years were not vaccinated. Death was reported in 30 cases ranging in age from 15 days to 41 years of age (median, 7.5 months).To date, the number of reported measles cases is above the average annual number (12 cases) registered in the past 10 years in the country, with the highest number (48 cases) reported in 2012.In 2013, Tunisia changed its immunization strategy and introduced the first dose of measles-containing-vaccine at the age of 12 months instead of 9 months (Fig. 1).The Ministry of Health (MoH) in Tunisia is coordinating the response activities, with the support of WHO and other partners. Public health response measures include:A total of seven Tunisian governorates have a border with Algeria. Despite the absence of official number for people crossing the border, it is known that many families move freely between the two countries, which induces a moderate risk at regional level, whereas the risk at global level remains low.Measles is a highly contagious viral disease which affects susceptible individuals of all ages and remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally, despite the availability of safe and effective measles-containing vaccines. It is transmitted via droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat of infected persons. Initial symptoms, which usually appear 10–12 days after infection, include high fever, usually accompanied by one or several of the following: runny nose, conjunctivitis, cough and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. Several days later, a rash develops, starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreads downwards. A patient is infectious 4 days before the start of the rash to 4 days after the appearance of the rash. Most people recover within 2–3 weeks.While there is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, the provision of vitamin A is recommended by WHO for all children infected with measles, as it is associated with reduced mortality and severity of complications. In populations with high levels of malnutrition and a lack of adequate health care, up to 10% of measles cases result in death and in most vulnerable groups deaths can reach up to 30%. Among malnourished children and people with greater susceptibility, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, and pneumonia.In countries with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.Immunization is the only effective preventive measure against measles. Two doses of measles-rubella (MR) are recommended to ensure immunity.WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel to, and trade with Tunisia based on the available information from the current outbreak.The Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak response this past week continues to be hampered by insecurity. On 3 May in Katwa, a Safe and Dignified Burial (SDB) team was violently attacked following the completion of a burial for a deceased EVD case. In Butembo and surrounding health zones, response activities were repeatedly halted due to a number of serious security incidents taking place from 4-6 May. On 8 May, a group of over 50 armed militia infiltrated the city centre. Security forces repelled the attack following intense gunfire in close proximity to staff accommodations. Although activities resumed on 9 May, after almost five consecutive days of suspension, threats of further attacks against EVD response teams and facilities remain prevalent.These security incidents, and especially the resultant lack of access to EVD affected communities, remain a major impediment to the response, with teams unable to perform robust surveillance nor deliver much needed treatment and immunisations. The ongoing violent attacks sow fear, perpetuate mistrust, and further compound the multitude of challenges already faced by frontline healthcare workers. Without commitment from all groups to cease these attacks, it is unlikely that this EVD outbreak can remain successfully contained in North Kivu and Ituri provinces.EVD transmission remains most intense in Katwa, Butembo, Mandima, Mabalako, Musienene, Beni and Kalunguta hotspot health zones, which collectively account for the vast majority (93%) of the 303 cases reported in the last 21 days between 17 April – 7 May 2019 (Figure 1 and Table 1). During this period, new cases were reported from 78 health areas within 15 of the 21 health zones affected to date (Figure 2). It is expected that the resumption of response activities will bring a substantial increase in the number of cases reported in the coming weeks due to the backlog from the disruptions.As of 7 May, a total of 1600 confirmed and probable EVD cases have been reported, of which 1069 died (case fatality of 67%). Of the total cases with recorded sex and age, 57% (907) were female and 30% (475) were children aged less than 18 years. The number of healthcare workers affected has risen to 97 (6% of total cases). 442 EVD patients who received care at Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) have been successfully discharged.On 7 May 2019, the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) issued new vaccination recommendations in light of the increasing number of EVD cases and continued insecurity in this outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (click here for the full recommendations). The panel made recommendations pertaining to adjusting vaccine dosages, expanding vaccine eligibility, ring vaccination operational improvements, and strengthening training of local healthcare workers to aid in the EVD response.The rVSV ZEBOV GP vaccine dosage and eligibility criteria have been revised. For high-risk individuals such as contacts and contacts of contacts, the new SAGE recommendations advise the use of 0.5mL of vaccine instead of 1mL. This revised dose has been previously used during the 2015 Ebola ça Suffit! trial in Guinea, and is expected to provide similar efficacy in this current EVD outbreak. Those at lower risks are now to receive 0.2mL instead. SAGE also recommends expanding the accessibility of the vaccine to more individuals in affected health areas. In addition to high-risk individuals, it is now recommended that individuals who are potential contacts due to their residence in the villages or neighbourhoods with incident cases (i.e. where EVD cases have been reported in the last 21 days) be offered the rVSV ZEBOV GP vaccine. SAGE believes that by expanding vaccine eligibility, this would address some of the requests from communities in affected health areas for the vaccine to be more widely available, foster greater trust, and improve willingness of communities to engage with other EVD response activities.SAGE advised the implementation of an adaptive operational approach to ring vaccinations, implemented in two main methods: pop-up vaccinations and targeted geographic vaccinations. Pop-up vaccination would be conducted by inviting contacts and contacts of contacts to a previously agreed upon temporary location some distance away from the residence of contacts. In areas where accurate identification of contacts and contacts of contacts is not possible due to insecurity, targeted geographic vaccination of whole villages or quartiers would be administered at a fixed location with security present. Both of these vaccination operational methods have been utilised successfully before, and are expected to make the vaccination process more efficient and secure for both healthcare providers and the patients they are caring for.SAGE additionally recommends offering an alternative vaccine (other than rVSV-ZEBOV-GP) to those at lower risk within affected health areas or neighbouring areas. WHO has reviewed evidence provided by two vaccine manufacturers, and the adenovirus 26 vectored glycoprotein / MVA-BN (Ad26.ZEBOV/MVA-BN) investigational Ebola vaccine is being considered and evaluated by a coalition led by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness (CEPI) and the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. At this time, this vaccine is in the late stages of formal trials and is expected to be deployed to the field in the near future. These efforts are in line with previous SAGE recommendations regarding the need for more studies to assess the efficacy of additional, alternative Ebola vaccines.SAGE also supported the proposal to introduce alternative individual informed consent forms and follow up procedures which can potentially simplify and expedite both the vaccination and safety follow up processes. Aside from pregnant women who will be actively followed up until delivery or end of pregnancy, and infants 6-12 months of age who will receive a single visit at day 21, all other case follow up will be completed through passive reporting of adverse events via telephone.In addition to technical recommendations, WHO and partners are working closely with residents of Ebola-affected communities to empower them to take on greater ownership of the EVD response. Through intensifying training and engagement with local community members, WHO aims to have the majority of vaccination teams comprised of local healthcare providers by the end of the month. Other key elements to transferring ownership of the response to the communities includes fulfilling community requests made in relation to development projects, and ensuring all persons residing in at-risk areas are well-informed about the status of the outbreak, transmission prevention, and availability of care through further mass communication initiatives.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Biena, Bunia, Kalunguta, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lubero, Mangurujipa, Masereka, Musienene, Mutwanga, Nyankunde, Oicha, Rwampara and Tchomia.**Total cases and areas affected based during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low. Weekly increases in the number of new cases has been ongoing since late February 2019. A general deterioration of the security situation, and the persistence of pockets of community mistrust exacerbated by political tensions and insecurity, have resulted in recurrent temporary suspension and delays of case investigation and response activities in affected areas, reducing the overall effectiveness of interventions. However, recent community dialogue, outreach initiatives, and restoration of access to certain hotspot areas have resulted in some improvements in community acceptance of response activities and case investigation efforts. The high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, relatively low proportion of new cases who were known contacts under surveillance, existence of transmission chains linked to nosocomial infection, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs, and challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, are all factors increasing the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and increasing the risk of geographical spread both within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to neighbouring countries. The high rates of population movement occurring from outbreak affected areas to other areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and across porous borders to neighbouring countries during periods of heightened insecurity further compounds these risks. Additional risks are posed by the long duration of the current outbreak, fatigue amongst response staff, and ongoing strain on limited resources. Conversely, substantive operational readiness and preparedness activities in a number of neighbouring countries have likely increased capacity to rapidly detect cases and mitigated local spread. However, these efforts must continue to be scaled-up at this time.WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, please see:In the first two months of 2019, 34 300 measles cases have been reported in 42 countries of the WHO European Region, including 13 measles-related deaths in three countries (Albania, Romania and Ukraine). The majority of cases are reported in Ukraine, with more than 25 000 cases (>70%)1.As of 28 March 2019, the WHO European Region reported a total of 83 540 measles cases and 74 related deaths for 2018. This is compared to 25 869 cases and 42 deaths in 2017, and 5 273 cases and 13 deaths in 2016. In 2018, eight countries reported over 2 000 cases each including Ukraine (n= 53 218), Serbia (n=5 076), Israel (3 140), France (n=2 913), Italy, (n=2 686), Russian Federation (n=2 256), Georgia (n=2 203) and Greece (n=2 193).Although the European Region achieved its highest ever estimated coverage for the second dose of measles vaccination in 2017 (90%), countries with measles outbreaks have experienced a range of challenges in recent years including a decline or stagnation in overall routine immunization coverage in some cases, low coverage at subnational level or among some marginalized groups and immunity gaps in older populations. Most cases are occurring in unvaccinated or under-vaccinated individuals.According to the most recent report from the European Regional Verification Commission for Measles and Rubella Elimination (RVC), based on 2017 data, measles elimination has been verified in 37 (out of the 53) countries in the WHO European Region, which documented interrupted transmission for at least 36 months. Five countries provided evidence for the interruption of measles transmission for a period of at least 24 months but less than 36 months, and one for interruption for transmission for 12 months. Ten countries including Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, France, Georgia, Germany, Italy, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia and Ukraine remain endemic for measles. The RVC will meet in June 2019 to review reports from National Verification Committees (NVCs) for measles and rubella elimination documenting each country’s status by the end of 2018. All countries reporting measles cases continuously for 12 months or more will have to provide a detailed epidemiological and molecular epidemiology (measles virus genotypes and lineages) analysis to document absence of continuous measles transmission or re-established endemic transmission.1Numbers for 2016-2019 are based on monthly surveillance data received by WHO as of 28 March 2019. These data are reported in the WHO EpiData series and subject to change as new updates from countries are received.The European Vaccine Action Plan 2015–2020 (EVAP) states that at least 95% of individuals in every population needs to be immune, through two doses of vaccination or prior exposure to the virus, to ensure community protection for everyone – including babies too young to be vaccinated and others who cannot be immunized due to existing diseases and medical conditions. The EVAP was adopted unanimously by all 53 Member States in the European Region at the 64th session of the WHO Regional Committee for Europe on 18 September 2014.The WHO Regional Office for Europe continues to work with countries in the Region to enhance their immunization and disease surveillance systems. This includes building capacities and providing guidance to:Measles is a highly contagious viral disease. It remains one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality among young children globally, despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine. Transmission from person-to-person is airborne, as well as by direct or indirect contact of secretions (nasal, throat) of an infected person. The virus can cause widespread outbreaks in the presence of large numbers of susceptible persons.Even with implementation of outbreak response measures, measles continues to circulate in the European Region as a result of suboptimal vaccination coverage and population immunity gaps. If outbreak response is not timely and comprehensive, the virus will find its way into more pockets of vulnerable individuals and potentially spread to additional countries within and beyond the Region. It is proportional to the size of the population that remains susceptible to measles. Measles has also been reported among health workers and nosocomial transmission has contributed to some outbreaks.The impact on public health will persist until the ongoing outbreaks are controlled, routine immunization coverage is continuously high (≥ 95%) and immunity gaps in the population closed. As long as measles continues to circulate anywhere in the world, no country can avoid importation, but they can protect their populations through high routine and supplemental immunization coverage of susceptible individuals.Initial symptoms of measles, which usually appear 10-12 days after infection, include high fever, runny nose, red eyes, cough, and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. A few days later, a rash develops, starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreading downwards. A patient is usually infectious 4 days before the start of the rash to 4 days after the appearance of the rash.There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles. Vaccination is the only way to prevent the disease. High vaccination coverage of at least 95% with two doses of measles vaccines in all population groups and age cohorts at national level and in all districts is crucial to elimination.Countries need to identify susceptible individuals and population groups and consider undertaking catch-up immunization or supplementary immunization activities to close immunity gaps. Tailored strategies to reach older populations and marginalized groups may be required.Every opportunity should be used to vaccinate susceptible children, adolescents and adults. Measles-containing vaccines should also be recommended for susceptible persons intending to travel to countries where measles is endemic and where outbreaks are ongoing.To protect health workers, prevent nosocomial infections and limit transmission of these diseases, health workers should be vaccinated. This includes those with an uncertain vaccination status and no or unknown history of disease.Elimination of measles is a priority goal that all European countries have firmly committed to. In adopting the EVAP 2015–2020, all 53 Member States of the Region committed to eliminating measles and rubella as one of the Region’s priority immunization goals. The cornerstones for eliminating measles remain high population immunity to stop disease transmission and high-quality surveillance to monitor disease occurrence for public health action.The operating environment has become increasingly insecure and socio-politically complex. Insecurity remains a major impediment to ensuring timely response interventions in the affected communities. Ebola virus disease (EVD) response activities in Butembo and Katwa remained limited; however, these are gradually resuming following a comprehensive reinforcement of security measures and community engagement efforts. The overall security situation, nevertheless, remains volatile. While no significant injuries or damages are reported this week, access and activities in parts of Mandima, Masereka, Kalunguta and Vuhovi, remain irregular due to the presence of armed groups and other security concerns. New EVD cases are expected to continue to increase, in tandem with incidents of insecurity in these hotspot areas over the coming weeks, placing significant strain on response teams and the security resources available to secure their movements.Incidence of EVD cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo this week saw a considerable, although not unexpected, rise compared to the week prior. This observation is in line with previous instances where a disruption to response activities was followed by a spike in the number of new cases. Transmission remains most intense in the Katwa, Butembo, and Mandima hotspot areas (Figure 1 and Table 1). In addition, notable recurring re-introduction events having been documented in previously affected health zones such as Mabalako and Musienene, followed by local amplification and extension to affect new heath areas. In the 21 days between 10 – 30 April 2019, 70 health areas within 15 health zones reported new cases; 45% of the 157 health areas affected to date (Table 1 and Figure 2). During this period, a total of 292 confirmed cases were reported, the majority of which were from the health zones of Katwa (47%, n=137), Butembo (13%, n=38), Mandima (11%, n=32), Mabalako (7%, n=20), and Musienene (6%, n=17).As of 30 April, a total of 1495 confirmed and probable EVD cases have been reported, of which 984 died (case fatality rate 66%). Of the total cases with recorded sex and age, 56% (830) were female, and 28% (422) were children aged less than 18 years. The number of healthcare workers affected has risen to 92 (6% of total cases). To date, a total of 415 EVD patients who received care at Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) have been discharged.From 27 to 30 April, WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and WHO Regional Director for Africa Dr Matshidiso Moeti, visited Butembo to review current response activities and bolster support for the response personnel currently operating there. During the visit, Dr Tedros and Dr Moeti travelled to Butembo to express their gratitude and show support to WHO and partner organisation staff, while also assessing the next steps needed to strengthen both security and the Ebola response effort. They also met with local political, business and religious leaders, and called on them to accelerate their efforts to help stabilise the surrounding environment. The visit concluded with both Dr Tedros and Dr Moeti reiterating their concerns for the present situation and repeating their appeal to the international community to intensify support to contain the outbreak by bridging the funding gap.Risk Communication & Community Engagement (RCCE) and Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) teams have been collaborating in preparation for the launch of an IPC campaign due to commence on 5 May 2019, WHO World Hand Hygiene Day. The initial focus of this campaign is on Injection Safety, an initiative aimed at encouraging the greater use of oral medication over injectables and the safe use and handling of needles at healthcare facilities as a means of reducing EVD transmission risks. RCCE teams are also working closely with other WHO partners to bring about a new mass communication campaign in the coming weeks to promote key messages from all outbreak response pillars to the affected communities.As part of the continued efforts to empower communities to be more actively engaged in the EVD response, requests received from the numerous dialogues with local residents are being reviewed to aid the transfer of some of the response ownership back to the community. Recent dialogues have focused on addressing community-related incidents of reluctance or mistrust. Some notable successes from this effort have resulted, including some previously resistant contacts coming forward to re-engage with response activities, and pledging to assist by utilising their influence in the community to encourage greater cooperation with EVD response teams.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning. Other health zones include: Biena, Bunia, Kalunguta, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lubero, Mangurujipa, Masereka, Musienene, Mutwanga, Nyankunde, Oicha, Rwampara and Tchomia.**Total cases and areas affected based during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, please see:  This past week witnessed a notable escalation of security incidents surrounding the Ebola virus disease (EVD) response efforts. On 19 April, an attack on a hospital in Katwa by armed militia resulted in the tragic death of Dr Richard Mouzoko Kiboung, a WHO epidemiologist, and the injury of two other healthcare workers. To ensure the safety of all outbreak responders, Ebola response activities have been temporarily halted in some high-risk health areas until security measures can be reinforced.WHO, the UN, and the government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are actively collaborating to review current strategic and operational security measures to ensure the protection of healthcare workers in the field, and improve effective coordination and information sharing amongst all security elements covering the response. Existing operational security measures continue to be implemented and strengthened as well, including the establishment of security perimeters around the residences of EVD response personnel, increasing security at fixed locations, enhancing the joint quick response team (QRT) capacities of local police and UN security forces, and ensuring staff compliance with tracking procedures and adherence to curfew. These measures and other security risk management processes will be continually updated to reflect the needs of the evolving security situation on the ground.In addition to revising security measures, efforts in community outreach through direct dialogue with various community leaders are also being intensified. Since January, there has been a notable increase in community resistance incidents, primarily around Katwa and Butembo. Incidents in April are anticipated to reach or go beyond March levels. As gaining community understanding and acceptance is integral to our ability to mount an effective outbreak response, community engagement efforts remain a significant element of our response to alleviate future security risks to healthcare workers, develop and increase local community capacity to ensure continuity of response operations, and improve the overall security situation in EVD hotspot areas.Incidence of EVD cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo this week saw a lull compared to the week prior (Figure 1). However, this observation should be interpreted with caution and in the context of the recent disruption to response activities and case reporting in certain hotspot areas. In the 21 days between 3 – 23 April 2019, 62 health areas within 11 health zones reported new cases; 42% of the 147 health areas affected to date (Table 1 and Figure 2). During this period, a total of 255 confirmed cases were reported from Katwa (132), Butembo (29), Vuhovi (29), Mandima (21), Beni (15), Mabalako (9), Kalunguta (6), Musienene (6), Masereka (5), Oicha (2), and Kyondo (1).As of 23 April, a total of 1367 confirmed and probable EVD cases have been reported, of which 885 died (case fatality rate 65%). Of the total cases, 56% (765) were female, and 28% (386) were children aged less than 18 years. The number of healthcare workers affected has risen to 90 (7% of total cases), including 33 deaths. To date, a total of 392 EVD patients who received care at Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) have been discharged.*Other health zones include the following: Biena, Bunia, Kalunguta, Kayna, Komanda, Kyondo, Lubero, Mangurujipa, Masereka, Musienene, Mutwanga, Nyankunde, Oicha, Rwampara, and Tchomia..**Total cases and areas affected based during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert, and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low. Weekly increases in the number of new cases has been ongoing since late February 2019. A general deterioration of the security situation, and the persistence of pockets of community reluctance, refusal, and resistance due to mistrust exacerbated by political tensions and insecurity, have resulted in recurrent temporary suspension and delays of case investigation and response activities in affected areas, reducing the overall effectiveness of interventions. However, recent community dialogue, outreach initiatives, and restoration of access to certain hotspot areas have resulted in some improvements in community acceptance of response activities and case investigation efforts. The high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, relatively low proportion of new cases who were known contacts under surveillance, existence of transmission chains linked to nosocomial infection, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs, and challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, are all factors increasing the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and increasing the risk of geographical spread both within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to neighbouring countries. The high rates of population movement occurring from outbreak affected areas to other areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and across porous borders to neighbouring countries during periods of heightened insecurity further compounds these risks. Additional risks are posed by the long duration of the current outbreak, fatigue amongst response staff, and ongoing strain on limited resources. Conversely, substantive operational readiness and preparedness activities in a number of neighbouring countries, including vaccination of HCW and FLWs at prioritised health facilities, have likely increased capacity to rapidly detect cases and mitigated local spread; this must continue to be scaled-up.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, please see:  1 Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning.From 14 February through 31 March 2019, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 22 additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, including four deaths, associated with the outbreak in Wadi Aldwasir. Of the 22 cases, 19 were reported from Wadi Aldwasir city including two healthcare workers. The remaining three cases, which are epidemiologically linked to the outbreak, were healthcare workers from a hospital in Khamees Mushait city, Asir region.Since the beginning of this outbreak in January 2019, a total of 61 MERS-CoV cases, with a case fatality ratio of 13.1% (8/61), have been reported in Wadi Aldwasir city. The median age of reported cases was 46 years (range 16 to 85 years). Of the 61 cases, 65% (n=46) were male, and 23% (n = 14) were health care workers. Investigations into the source of infection of the 61 cases found that 37 were health-care acquired infections, 14 were primary cases presumed to be infected from contact with dromedary camels and the remaining (10) infections occurred among close contacts outside of health care settings. As previously reported1, two human to human transmission amplification events took place at a hospital during this outbreak (one amplification event in the emergency department, and one amplification event in a cardiac intensive care unit; Figure 1).Figure 1. Transmission chain of laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection associated with Wadi Aldwasir city, Riyadh region, outbreak, 2019 (n=61)The link below provides details of the 22 reported cases:From 2012 through 31 March 2019, a total of 2399 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV and 827 associated deaths were reported globally to WHO under the International Health Regulations (IHR). The associated deaths reported to WHO were identified through follow-up with affected member states.As reported previously, the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Health (MoH) has conducted and completed a full-scale investigation of the MERS outbreak in Wadi Aldwasir including identification of all household and healthcare worker contacts of confirmed patients in all of the hospitals affected.As of 31 March 2019, a total of 380 contacts have been identified, including 260 household contacts and 120 healthcare worker contacts. All identified contacts were monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure as per WHO and national guidelines for MERS. All secondary cases have been reported to WHO.Currently, all the listed contacts have been tested for MERS-CoV infection by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at least once and many contacts of known patients have been tested repeatedly. All secondary cases of MERS-CoV infection have been reported to WHO. The last case from Wadi Aldwasir was reported on 12 March 2019.Within the affected health care facilities, infection prevention and control measures have been enhanced including intensive mandatory on-the-job training on infection control measures for all healthcare workers in emergency room and intensive care unit. Disinfection has been carried out in the emergency room and ICU of hospital A, which is fully operational and additional staff were mobilized to support infection control activities. Respiratory triage has been enforced in all healthcare facilities in the Riyadh region.The MoH media department launched an awareness campaign targeting Wadi Aldawasir city with special focus on camel owners and camel related activities.The Ministry of Agriculture is testing dromedaries in Wadi Aldwasir city and initial results have identified several PCR positive dromedaries in the city. Positive camels have been removed from the market and movement in and out of the camel market has been restricted. Camels owned by confirmed human cases were quarantined regardless of testing results. Full genome sequencing of available human and dromedary specimens have been conducted. Laboratory findings of camel testing by the Ministry of Agriculture have been reported to the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE).Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high morbidity and mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with infected dromedary camels or by transmission between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of these additional cases does not change WHO’s overall risk assessment of MERS. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, dromedary camel animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting or household contacts).WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. Results of the completed epidemiological investigation, as well as full genome sequencing of available dromedary and human specimens are being used by Ministry of Health officials to further evaluate the zoonotic and human-to-human transmission that has occurred in Wadi Aldwasir outbreak.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control (IPC) measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.WHO recommends that comprehensive identification, follow up and testing of all contacts of MERS patients be conducted, if feasible, regardless of the development of symptoms since approximately 20% of all reported MERS cases have been reported as mild or asymptomatic. The role of asymptomatic MERS-CoV infection in transmission is not well understood. However, reports of transmission from an asymptomatic MERS patient to another individual have been documented.MERS causes more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and compromised immune systems. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close unprotected contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking camel’s raw milk or camel urine or eating camel meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.1 Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) – The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia – 26 February 2019The incidence of Ebola virus disease (EVD) cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to increase this week; however, it remained confined to a limited geographical area within North Kivu and Ituri provinces. This recent trend is likely attributable, in part, to past and ongoing security issues, unrest amongst certain local populations, and lingering community mistrust towards outbreak response teams. Improved case detection and response activities have been observed in previously inaccessible hotspots.In the 21 days between 27 March and 16 April 2019, 55 health areas within 11 health zones reported new cases; 39% of the 143 health areas affected to date (Table 1 and Figure 2). During this period, a total of 249 confirmed cases were reported from Katwa (124), Vuhovi (40), Mandima (28), Butembo (24), Beni (16), Oicha (6), Mabalako (5), Kalunguta (2), Masereka (2), Musienene (1), and Lubero (1).As of 16 April, a total of 1290 confirmed and probable EVD cases have been reported, of which 833 died (case fatality rate 65%). Of the 1290 cases with reported age and sex, 56% (725) were female, and 28% (361) were children aged less than 18 years. The number of healthcare workers affected has risen to 89 (7% of total cases), including 32 deaths. To date, a total of 379 EVD patients who received care at Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) have been discharged.On 12 April 2019, the International Health Regulation (IHR) Emergency Committee convened in Geneva, Switzerland, to discuss whether the EVD outbreak posed a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and offer response recommendations. While the Emergency Committee and the WHO Director-General reiterated their serious concern at the recent rise in the number of cases and the high risk of regional spread, upon consultation with various technical experts and further review of available epidemiological data, it was concluded that the current outbreak did not constitute a PHEIC. For the complete WHO statement concerning the 12 April IHR Emergency Committee meeting, please see here.The ongoing vaccination efforts have produced some promising results this past week. On 12 April 2019, WHO and Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale (INRB) published a preliminary analysis concerning the efficacy of the rVSV-ZEBOV-GP vaccine currently utilised in this outbreak (please see full report here). The data suggested the vaccine demonstrated notable efficacy in preventing Ebola infections in vaccinated individuals compared to those who are unvaccinated. Between 2-4 April 2019, the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) convened a meeting to review the epidemiological data and offer further recommendations to the ongoing vaccination efforts. They urged the further expansion of those eligible for vaccination to include children older than 6 months and lactating women; two populations observed to have especially high attack rates and high case fatality rates (please see here for further highlights from the SAGE meeting).In light of the findings, WHO and partners are evolving the existing vaccination strategy on the ground. Along with intensifying contact tracing of cases and vaccinating their known immediate contacts, a greater emphasis is being placed on following up contacts of contacts and ensuring these at-risk individuals are adequately vaccinated against Ebola. Various approaches are being employed at this time to vaccinate people at-risk including:Through these strategies, 23 operational vaccination teams have effectively closed previously observed gaps in the vaccination rings surrounding reported cases; rings are currently pending for 10 of the 257 cases confirmed during the period between 28 March to 16 April 2019. As of 16 April, a total of 102 501 contacts and contacts of contacts have been vaccinated, of whom 29 720 were HCWs/FLWs. Outside of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, vaccination of frontline healthcare workers commenced in neighbouring Rwanda on 16 April 2019, with 176 HCWs/FLWs already vaccinated. It is expected that the vaccination strategy will be an effective means to slowing the spread of EVD.Infection prevention and control (IPC) efforts have also yielded some notable progress this past week. A revised IPC strategy with an operational work plan for February to May 2019 period has been endorsed by the Ministry of Health (MoH). The strategy and work plan are intended to guide the national coordination activities of the Ebola response’s IPC Task Force, and the implementation of activities by the IPC commissions and partners at the subnational level. To support this operational shift, Risk Communication and Community Engagement research initiatives are being developed to better understand transmission pathways that can be addressed by the IPC coordination activities. Additional support will be provided by collecting feedback through community dialogue on how IPC can be better implemented at the community level.While the EVD outbreak remains ongoing and the rise in number of cases is likely to continue in the following weeks, it should be noted that substantial progress has been made to adapt response strategies to the ever-evolving situation. Despite the multitude of challenges posed by having to mount a robust outbreak response in the demanding circumstances in which this EVD outbreak is currently taking place, WHO and partners are continuing to intensify all facets of the response efforts to curtail the further spread of EVD in the North Kivu and Ituri provinces.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning.**Total cases and areas affected based during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert, and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of HealthFor further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  This past week saw a marked increase in the number of Ebola virus disease (EVD) cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During the last 21 days (13 March to 2 April 2019), 57 health areas within 12 health zones reported new cases; 42% of the 135 health areas affected to date (Table 1 and Figure 2). During this period, a total of 172 confirmed cases were reported from Katwa (50), Vuhovi (34), Mandima (28), Masereka (18), Beni (13), Butembo (12), Oicha (8), Kayna (3), Lubero (3), Kalunguta (1), Bunia (1) and Musienene (1). WHO and partners will continue to adapt our strategies and strengthen response efforts to limit the further spread of EVD in these health areas.As of 2 April, a total of 1100 confirmed and probable EVD cases have been reported, of which 690 died (case fatality ratio 63%). Of the 1100 cases with reported age and sex, 58% (633) were female, and 29% (320) were children aged less than 18 years. The number of healthcare workers affected has risen to 81 (7% of total cases), including 27 deaths.To date, a total of 338 EVD patients who received care at Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) have been discharged. As part of a broader programme to provide care for Ebola survivors and build sustainable, local response capacity, an eye care training programme and clinic was completed this week in Beni through the combined efforts of WHO, Ministry of Health, and a team of ophthalmologists from Emory University and the University of North Carolina. A total of 252 EVD survivors were screened in the eye clinic and ten national ophthalmologists were trained to provide higher level eye care in their communities. Feedback from participating national healthcare providers and enrolled survivors was overwhelmingly positive. Of note were some of the clinical findings witnessed in the present cohort of EVD survivors. The team noted that complications such as uveitis were observed at lower rates when compared to cases from the 2014-16 West Africa EVD outbreak.A Risk Communication and Community Engagement partners meeting was held in Goma from 25-26 March, involving more than 80 participants representing the different partners participating in the outbreak response. The discussion focused on engagement strategies that have worked in the past, what is working on the ground currently, and what needs to be improved to build upon our current gains and address future challenges.The recent shift of emphasis in the response strategy to promoting greater engagement and ownership by affected communities is beginning to produce results. While community reluctance and mistrust remain present in certain areas around Butembo and Katwa, other areas saw a notable decrease in resistance to the presence of response workers. Diligent efforts at engaging with community committees through direct dialogue resulted in the reopening of the ETC in Katwa, bringing the total number of operational facilities providing care up to six ETCs in Beni, Butembo, Goma, Komanda, Mangina, and six transit centres in Beni, Bunia, Katwa, Kayna, Bwanasura, and Oicha. A more proactive approach to investigating and resolving incidents in the communities is also being undertaken to minimise the risk of misunderstandings and to mitigate potential sources of mistrust between local residents and healthcare providers.The increase in the number of cases this week highlights the difficult environment the outbreak is occurring in, as well as the multitude of evolving challenges confronting the outbreak response on a daily basis. A holistic approach involving rigorous implementation of proven measures to break chains of transmission, thorough contract tracing, continued vaccination of high-risk contacts, and persistent efforts in community engagement must be persevered with to curtail the spread of EVD in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning.**Total cases and areas affected based during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert, and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low. Attacks on ETCs in Katwa and Butembo represented the first large-scale and organized attacks targeted directly at the Ebola response, and were of a different order of magnitude to episodes of mistrust in communities or dangers of being caught in crossfire between fighting parties. In addition, the persistence of pockets of community mistrust, exacerbated by political tensions and insecurity, have resulted in recurrent temporary suspension and delays of case investigation and response activities in affected areas; reducing the overall effectiveness of interventions. The high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs, challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, collectively increase the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and increased risk of geographical spread within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to neighbouring countries. As do the risk of increased population movement anticipated during periods of heightened insecurity.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation and the availability of laboratory results.From 1 through 28 February 2019, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 68 additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, including 10 deaths. Of the 68 MERS cases reported in February, 19 cases occurred in cities other than Wadi Aldwasir.This Disease Outbreak News update describes the 19 cases. Among these cases, fifteen were sporadic, and four were reported as part of two unrelated clusters. Cluster 1 involved two cases in Buridah city; and Cluster 2 involved two cases in Riyadh city. The link below provides details of the 19 reported cases.A separate Disease Outbreak News will provide an update on the outbreak in Wadi Aldwasir which affected 49 cases and resulted in seven deaths in February making a total of 52 cases since the onset of the outbreak.From 2012 through 28 February 2019, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS cases reported globally to WHO is 2374 with 823 associated deaths. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high morbidity and mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with infected dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans, especially from close unprotected contact with infected patients. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of these additional cases does not change WHO’s overall risk assessment of MERS. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (e.g. consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (e.g. in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control (IPC) measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.WHO recommends that comprehensive identification, follow up and testing of all contacts of MERS patients be conducted, if feasible, regardless of the development of symptoms since approximately 20% of all reported MERS cases have been reported as mild or asymptomatic. The role of asymptomatic MERS-CoV infection in transmission is not well understood. However, reports of transmission from an asymptomatic MERS patient to another individual have been documented.MERS causes more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and compromised immune systems. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close unprotected contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking camel’s raw milk or camel urine or eating camel meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.The ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the North Kivu and Ituri provinces saw a rise in the number of new cases this past week. At this time, response teams are facing daily challenges in ensuring timely and thorough identification and investigation of all cases amidst a backdrop of sporadic violence from armed groups and pockets of mistrust in some affected communities. Despite this, progress is being made in areas such as Mandima, Masereka and Vuhovi, where response teams are gradually able to access once again and acceptance by the community of proven interventions to break the chains of transmission is observed.During the last 21 days (6 – 26 March), a total of 125 new cases were reported from 51 health areas within 12 of the 21 health zones affected to date; 38% of the 133 health areas affected to date (Figure 2). The majority of these cases were from remaining hotspot areas of Katwa (36), Butembo (14), and three emerging clusters in Mandima (19), Masereka (18) and Vuhovi (17), in addition to a limited number of cases in other areas (Table 1). All cases link back to chains of transmission in hotspot areas, with onward local transmission observed in a limited number of towns and villages within family/social networks or health centers where cases have visited prior to their detection and isolation.As of 26 March, a total of 1029 confirmed and probable EVD cases have been reported, of which 642 died (case fatality ratio 62%). Of 1029 cases with reported age and sex, 57% (584) were female, and 30% (307) were children aged less than 18 years. The number of healthcare workers affected has risen to 78 (8% of total cases), including 27 deaths.Community engagement efforts to encourage greater local participation and ownership of the outbreak response is ongoing and has yielded some success in many areas. In Butembo and Katwa this past week, a total of 4171 households have been visited by community health volunteers and Red Cross volunteers. This past week also saw the establishment of nine community committees to enhance direct dialogue with healthcare workers and empower community members to partake in the decision-making process of the local response. Special dialogues are being held in the communities where there have been the most frequent incidents. Herein, an anthropologist first meets with the community to ascertain their concerns, then arranges for communal meetings where these concerns can be discussed, including amongst local youth leaders, women’s associations, traditional practitioners, and healthcare providers.As of 26 March, 324 EVD patients have recovered and been discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres. In Beni, local NGOs and international teams are currently conducting eye care training for ten ophthalmologists and establishing dedicated eye care clinics to provide screening and eye care for EVD survivors. To date, 145 survivors have been screened in these clinics and a total of 293 survivors have enrolled in the survivor’s programme.Notable strides have also been made in improving IPC capacities in healthcare facilities. Since January, IPC field teams have decontaminated over 250 healthcare facilities and households, provided over 100 supply kits, and trained over 3000 healthcare workers in IPC. A recent National IPC workshop has been completed to aid the implementation of new IPC strategies, while the establishment of an IPC task force has further improved partner communication and coordination at all levels. The work is, however, is ongoing and IPC teams continue to respond to new instances of nosocomial transmission with the emergence of clusters in previously unaffected communities and health facilities.These local successes do not come without its challenges. When visiting communities in high risk areas, Ebola response teams sometimes face security challenges. Though no major security incidents have been reported over the last 10 days, the overall situation remains fragile. WHO and partners have recently established operational analysis and coordination centres to both gain a more holistic understanding of how we can engage communities more effectively, as well as further increase operational awareness of the day to day operations to ensure the safety of frontline healthcare workers and the communities they are aiding. WHO and partners have also strengthened physical security in the treatment centres and accommodations of healthcare workers.Finding a balance between providing adequate operational protection to community members at risk of Ebola and healthcare workers while simultaneously winning the trust of communities remains an iterative learning process. WHO is constantly evolving the response efforts to address these operational challenges and will continue to step up collaboration with communities to increase acceptance on the ground.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning.**Total cases and areas affected based during the last 21 days are based on the initial date of case alert, and may differ from date of confirmation and daily reporting by the Ministry of Health.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low. Attacks on ETCs in Katwa and Butembo represented the first large-scale and organized attacks targeted directly at the Ebola response, and were of a different order of magnitude to episodes of mistrust in communities or dangers of being caught in crossfire between fighting parties. In addition, the persistence of pockets of community mistrust, exacerbated by political tensions and insecurity, have resulted in recurrent temporary suspension and delays of case investigation and response activities in affected areas; reducing the overall effectiveness of interventions. The high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs, challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, collectively increase the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and increased risk of geographical spread within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to neighbouring countries. As do the risk of increased population movement anticipated during periods of heightened insecurity.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation and the availability of laboratory results.The Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in North Kivu and Ituri provinces has recently shown an increase in the number of cases reported by week, after many weeks of overall decline (Figure 1). This rise is not unexpected and, in part, likely a result of the increased security challenges, including the recent direct attacks on treatment centers, and pockets of community mistrust, which slowed some response activities in affected areas for a few days.Katwa, Butembo, Masereka and Mandima account for over 80% of all cases in the last 21 days. A total of 97 confirmed cases were reported during the last 21 days from 38 of the 130 health areas affected to date (Table 1, Figure 2). This week, EVD was confirmed in an infant who died in Bunia Health Zone, but whose parents are in good health. This is the first confirmed case from this health zone; a previous case was identified from neighbouring Rwampara Health Zone in early February. While investigations are ongoing to determine the source of the infection, teams in place have rapidly implemented response activities including contact tracing, vaccination and heightened surveillance. Given the geographical spread of the epidemic and the high mobility in this region, the risk of Ebola spreading to unaffected areas or being reintroduced to previously affected areas remains high.Response teams are fully operational in all outbreak affected areas. There are encouraging improvements in community acceptance of the response, despite the ongoing challenges of insecurity caused by armed groups. Over 90% of people eligible for vaccination have accepted to do so, and over 90% of these individuals having participated in follow-up visits. To date, 89 855 people have been vaccinated. Vaccination teams are continuing to follow-up on the rings where some families have not yet accepted the intervention.Field laboratories have sustained similar testing rates as previous weeks. On average, 1300 samples are tested weekly and more than 23 000 samples have been tested to date with a turnaround time of less than 48 hours. Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) and Transit Centres continue to operate, and the Katwa Transit Centre is being scaled up by ALIMA to increase capacity to respond to the outbreak in that area. To date, 335 patients have received one of the four investigational therapeutics under the MEURI protocol (compassionate use), and 80 patients under the RCT protocol.In Butembo, Katwa, and Vuhovi health zones, response teams have continued to engage communities through various community dialogue platforms. Five community dialogue platforms have been organised in three health areas in Katwa, one health area in Butembo and one health area in Vuhovi. This initiative allows community members to participate and lead in decisions regarding Ebola response interventions in their localities. In other EVD-affected areas, ongoing activities include systematic collection of community feedback and responding to community concerns through adjustments of activities in consultation with community leaders and influencers. Community outreach activities are carried out in faith-based settings, market places, and schools with the collaboration of faith-based leaders and civil society groups (including women and youth). Civil society groups and community health volunteers also assist in the door-to-door community outreach activities on a regular basis.Since the beginning of the outbreak to 19 March 2019, 980 EVD cases1 (915 confirmed and 65 probable) have been reported, of which 57% (554) were female and 30% (293) were children aged less than 18 years. Cumulatively, cases have been reported from 130 of 339 health areas across 21 health zones of the North Kivu and Ituri provinces (Table 1). Overall, 610 deaths (case fatality ratio: 62%) have been reported, and 317 patients have been discharged after treatment in ETCs.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last assessment concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low. Attacks on ETCs in Katwa and Butembo represented the first large-scale and organized attacks targeted directly at the Ebola response, and were of a different order of magnitude to episodes of mistrust in communities or dangers of being caught in crossfire between fighting parties. In addition, the persistence of pockets of community resistance and mistrust, exacerbated by political tensions and insecurity, have resulted in recurrent temporary suspension and delays of case investigation and response activities in affected areas; reducing the overall effectiveness of interventions. The high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs, challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, collectively increase the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and increased risk of geographical spread within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to neighbouring countries. As do the risk of increased population movement anticipated during periods of heightened insecurity.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation and the availability of laboratory results.The public health response to the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak continues to make gains. During the last 21 days (20 February – 12 March 2019), no new cases have been detected in 10 of the 20 health zones that have been affected during the outbreak (Figure 1). There has also been fewer new cases observed over the past five weeks compared to January 2019 and earlier in the outbreak (Figure 2).Currently, the greatest concern centres on the neighbouring urban areas of Katwa and Butembo, which continue to contribute about three-quarters of recent cases. Clusters in other areas of North Kivu and Ituri provinces have been linked to chains of transmission in Katwa and Butembo, and have thus far been contained to limited local transmissions with relatively small numbers of cases. A total of 74 confirmed cases were reported during the last 21 days from 32 of the 125 health areas affected to date (Table 1). Risk of further chains of transmission and spread remain high, as highlighted by the recent spread to Lubero Health Zone, and reintroduction to Biena Health Zone following a prolonged period without new cases.Response teams are fully operational in all outbreak affected areas and there are encouraging improvements in community acceptance of the response, despite the challenges of ongoing insecurity caused by armed groups. For example, during the last 21 days in Katwa and Butembo, 88% of the 256 families with a family member who died and was suspected to have EVD, accepted the support from response teams to conduct a safe and dignified burial. Seventy-four new vaccination rings were launched, with over 90% of people eligible for vaccination accepting to do so, and over 90% of these participated in follow-up visits. A total of 5974 people (including 2159 health and frontline workers) consented and were vaccinated this period; overall 87,632 people have been vaccinated to date. Vaccination teams are continuing to follow-up on 12 rings wherein the families have not yet accepted the intervention, and two other rings that are in the process of being defined. Seven field laboratories have remained fully operational, sustaining similar testing rates as previous weeks. During the past week, 1213 samples from new suspected cases, community deaths and previously confirmed cases were tested within 48 hours. Outreach teams made up mostly of local volunteers also met with 6000 households during the past week, building local knowledge of Ebola, and referring sick individuals to either Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) or other health facilities as appropriate. In the last two weeks, community dialogues were held in several villages in Katwa and Vuhovi to find ways in engaging community members to build trust and ownership in the Ebola response.Efforts to strengthen case finding and investigation, and contact tracing activities are also bearing fruit. Of 74 confirmed cases reported in the last 21 days, 83% (62 cases) have been epidemiologically linked to active chains of transmission; either listed as contacts at illness onset (47 cases) or linked retrospectively to other cases or health centre where they were likely exposed (15 cases). Investigations are ongoing to identify links for the remaining cases.Challenges include further attacks by armed groups on affected communities and ETCs, elements of community mistrust, and persistent delays in getting people into care in ETCs for various reasons. The Ministry of Health, WHO and partners continue to work actively to build community trust and participation in the response, while reinforcing security measures to protect patients and response teams. The ETC in Butembo has been rebuilt following two attacks and is treating patients again, and the Katwa Transit Centre remains operational.Since the beginning of the outbreak to 12 March 2019, 927 EVD cases1 (862 confirmed and 65 probable) have been reported, of which 57% (525) were female and 30% (280) were children aged less than 18 years. Cumulatively, cases have been reported from 125 of 319 health areas across 20 health zones of the North Kivu and Ituri provinces (Table 1). Overall, 584 deaths (case fatality ratio: 63%) have been reported, and 308 patients have been discharged from ETCs.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The latest assessment on 6 March 2019 concluded that the national and regional risk levels remain very high, while global risk levels remain low. The outbreak has continued with a similar epidemiological profile to the last assessment. Attacks on ETCs in Katwa and Butembo represented the first large-scale and organized attacks targeted directly at the Ebola response, and were of a different order of magnitude to episodes of mistrust in communities or dangers of being caught in crossfire between fighting parties. In addition, the persistence of pockets of community resistance and mistrust, exacerbated by political tensions and insecurity, have resulted in recurrent temporary suspension and delays of case investigation and response activities in affected areas; reducing the overall effectiveness of interventions. These events occur amidst declining trends in case incidence; however, the high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs, challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, collectively increase the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and increased risk of geographical spread within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to neighbouring countries. As do the risk of increased population movement anticipated during periods of heightened insecurity.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation and the availability of laboratory results.The Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak is continuing with moderate intensity. Katwa and Butembo remain the major health zones of concern, while small clusters continue simultaneously in some geographically dispersed locations. During the last 21 days (13 February – 5 March 2019), 76 new confirmed and probable cases have been reported from 31 health areas within nine health zones (Figure 1), including: Katwa (44), Butembo (17), Mandima (6), Masereka (3), Kalunguta (2), Beni (1), Vuhovi (1), Kyondo (1), and Rwampara (1). The emerging cluster in Mandima health zone is occurring in a previously unaffected village, with five of the recent cases epidemiologically linked and the sixth case likely exposed in Butembo; nonetheless, there remains a high risk of further spread. Similarly, recent cases (two confirmed and one probable) in Masereka stem from a Butembo chain of transmission. These events highlight the importance for response teams to remain active across all areas, including those with lower case incidence, to rapidly detect new cases and prevent onward transmission.As of 5 March, 907 EVD cases1 (841 confirmed and 66 probable) have been reported, of which 57% (514) were female and 30% (273) were children aged less than 18 years. Cumulatively, cases have been reported from 121 of 301 health areas across 19 health zones of the North Kivu and Ituri provinces. Overall, 569 deaths (case fatality ratio: 63%) have been reported, and 304 patients have been discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs). Although declining trends in case incidence are currently being observed, the high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases, relatively low proportion of new cases who were known contacts under surveillance, persistent delays in detection and isolation in ETCs (related as well to recent violent incidents), and challenges in the timely reporting and response to probable cases, all increase the likelihood of further chains of transmission in affected communities and continued spread.Following the attacks on two ETCs in Katwa and Butembo, patients were temporarily transferred to the Katwa Transit Centre. On 2 March, the Butembo ETC was rehabilitated and resumed treatment of EVD patients. Response teams are progressively resuming activities in all affected areas with the exception of two health areas where security and community resistance remain a challenge.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation and the availability of laboratory results.The Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak is continuing with moderate intensity. Katwa and Butembo remain the major health zones of concern, while simultaneously, small clusters continue to occur in various geographically dispersed locations. During the last 21 days (6 – 26 February 2019), 77 new cases have been reported from 33 health areas within nine health zones (Figure 1), including: Katwa (45), Butembo (19), Vuhovi (4), Kyondo (3), Kalunguta (2), Oicha (1), Beni (1), Mandima (1), and Rwampara (1).Although there are decreasing trends in case incidence (Figure 2), the high proportion of community deaths reported among confirmed cases and relatively low number of new cases who were known contacts under surveillance could increase the risk of further chains of transmission in affected communities. Response teams must maintain a high degree of vigilance across all areas with declining case incidence and contact tracing activity, as well as in areas with active cases, to rapidly detect new cases and prevent onward transmission. Following attacks this week on the treatment centres in Katwa and Butembo, WHO is working with partners to ensure the safety of the patients and staff. These incidents are disruptive to the response on many levels and can also hamper surveillance activities in the field.As of 26 February, 879 EVD cases1 (814 confirmed and 65 probable) have been reported, of which 57% (499) were female and 30% (264) were children aged less than 18 years. Cumulatively, cases have been reported from 119 of 301 health areas across 19 health zones. Overall, 553 deaths (case fatality ratio: 63%) have been reported and as of 19 February 2019, 257 survivors have been reported. There is ongoing cleaning of the case database to correct the number deaths and survivors discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs).Source: Ministry of Health, Democratic Republic of the Congo*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. National and regional risk levels remain very high, though global risk levels remain low. This EVD outbreak is affecting primarily the north-eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bordering Uganda, Rwanda and South Sudan. There is a potential risk for transmission of EVD at the national and regional levels due to extensive travel between the affected areas, the rest of the country, and neighbouring countries for economic and personal reasons, as well as due to insecurity. The country is concurrently experiencing other epidemics (e.g. cholera, vaccine-derived poliomyelitis, malaria, measles), and a long-term humanitarian crisis. Additionally, the fragile security situation in North Kivu and Ituri, further limits the implementation of response activities.As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation, and the availability of laboratory results.On 6 February 2019, the National IHR Focal Point of The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia notified WHO of an ongoing outbreak of MERS-CoV infection in Wadi Aldwasir city and one of its hospitals (referred to as Hospital A). Between 29 January and 13 February 2019, 39 cases of MERS-CoV infection, including four deaths, were reported. At the time of writing, this outbreak remains ongoing. Human-to-human transmission has occurred between the index patient and health care workers, patients in the emergency department and intensive care unit (ICU) of Hospital A, and from patients to household contacts. As of 13 February, nine health care workers have been infected. Descriptions of the outbreak are based on information WHO has received as of 13 February 2019; further updates will be provided as they become available.Details regarding each of the cases are provided in the file linked below.From 2012 through 13 February 2019, a total of 2 345 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV, along with 817 associated deaths, have been reported to WHO globally. The number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases globally reported to WHO under IHR to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.The Saudi Arabian Ministry of Health (MoH) has launched a full-scaled investigation of the outbreak in Wadi Aldwasir, including identification of all household and healthcare worker contacts of confirmed patients. As of 13 February, a total of 350 contacts have been identified, including 230 household contacts and 120 healthcare worker contacts. All identified contacts will continue to be monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure as per WHO and national guidelines for MERS-CoV.Currently, symptomatic and high-risk exposure contacts have been tested for MERS-CoV infection by RT-PCR at least once and many contacts of known patients have been tested repeatedly. Any secondary cases of MERS-CoV infection have been reported to WHO. As of 13 February, the MoH believes that the possible active human-to-human transmission is minimized. The latest cases represent contacts who initially tested negative for MERS-CoV by RT-PCR, but were confirmed positive in subsequent repeat testing. WHO expects more cases epidemiologically linked to known cases to be reported.Within the health care facilities with high risk of MERS-CoV transmission, infection prevention and control measures have been enhanced, including intensive mandatory on-the-job training on infection control measures for all healthcare workers in emergency room and ICU. Disinfection has been carried out in the emergency room and ICU of Hospital A, and respiratory triage has been enforced in all healthcare facilities in the Riyadh region. Additional hospital staff are also mobilized to support infection control activities. At this time, Hospital A is fully operational.The MoH media department has launched an awareness campaign targeting Wadi Aldawasir city with special focus on camel owners and camel-related activities.The Ministry of Agriculture is testing dromedaries in the Wadi Aldwasir area. Three dromedaries have tested positive via PCR and these animals were removed from the local market. Movement in and out of the camel market has also been restricted. Camels owned by confirmed human cases were quarantined regardless of testing results as a precaution. Full genome sequencing of available human and dromedary specimens will be conducted.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high morbidity and mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect unprotected contact with infected dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.As of 13 February, 39 cases have been identified and reported as part of the Wadi Aldwasir outbreak. At the time of writing, contact follow-up is ongoing. It is likely that more cases resulting from human-to-human transmission may be reported as part of this outbreak. The occurrence of this nosocomial transmission is deeply concerning. However, the epidemiologic patterns are not unusual and there are no signs so far that suggest further propagation of the outbreak. Human-to-human transmission between patients and health care workers, between patients sharing spaces in health care facilities, and from patients to household members, can occur when there are delays in isolation of suspected cases, inadequate infection and control measures, and late case management.The notification of these additional cases does not change WHO’s overall risk assessment of MERS-CoV. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to infected dromedary camels, animal products (e.g. consumption of raw camel milk), or other human cases (e.g. in a health care setting). WHO will continue to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessment based on the latest available information. Results of the completed epidemiological investigation, as well as full genome sequencing of available dromedary and human specimens are currently pending. These results will provide information of the extent of dromedary-to-human and human-to-human transmission in this outbreak.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV infection early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.WHO recommends that comprehensive identification, follow up and testing of all contacts of MERS-CoV infected patients be conducted, if feasible, regardless of the development of symptoms since approximately 20% of all reported MERS-CoV infections have been reported as mild or asymptomatic. The role of asymptomatic MERS-CoV infection in transmission is not well understood. However, reports of transmission from an asymptomatic MERS-CoV infected patient to another individual have been documented.MERS-CoV causes more severe disease in people who are immunocompromised or have underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, or chronic lung disease. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with dromedary camels when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should also be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, and refrain from eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regards to this event, and does not currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions at this time.The Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak is continuing with moderate intensity. Katwa and Butembo remain the major health zones of concern, while simultaneously, small clusters continue to occur in various geographically dispersed locations. During the last 21 days (30 January – 19 February 2019), 79 new cases have been reported from 40 health areas within 12 health zones (Figure 1), including: Katwa (46), Butembo (15), Kyondo (4), Vuhovi (4), Kalunguta (2), Oicha (2), Biena (1), Mabalako (1), Manguredjipa (1), Masereka (1), Mutwanga (1), and Rwampara (1).1No new cases have been reported from the Beni in the last three weeks. This is a significant achievement given the previous intensity of the outbreak in this area. Elsewhere, trends in the case incidence (Figure 2) have been encouraging; however, other indicators (such as the continued high proportion of community deaths, persistent delays in case detection, documented local travel amongst many cases, and relatively low numbers of cases among contacts under surveillance) suggest a high risk of further chains of transmission in affected communities. Response teams must maintain a high degree of vigilance across all areas with declining case and contact tracing activity, as with areas with active cases, to rapidly detect new cases and prevent onward transmission.As of 19 February, 848 EVD cases2 (783 confirmed and 65 probable) have been reported, of which 57% (485) were female and 30% (258) were children aged less than 18 years. Cumulatively, cases have been reported from 119 of 301 health areas across 19 health zones. Ongoing cleaning of case databases this past week corrected to the number of deaths and survivors discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) thus far; overall 529 deaths (case fatality ratio: 62%) and 257 survivors have been reported to date.To complement ongoing response activities, the Ministry of Health is establishing a Strategic Coordination Centre in Goma. The new Centre will support the coordination and monitoring of the operations in close collaboration with sub-coordination teams working across all affected areas. The implementation of the Strategic Coordination Centre in Goma will not impact on the response capacity in the field, with WHO and partners continuing to maintain full-scale operations in Beni, Butembo and Bunia, as well as a strong presence in all affected Health Zones, to ensure the effectiveness of field operations.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously. For further detailed information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. National and regional risk levels remain very high, though global risk levels remain low. This EVD outbreak is affecting primarily the north-eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bordering Uganda, Rwanda and South Sudan. There is a potential risk for transmission of EVD at the national and regional levels due to extensive travel between the affected areas, the rest of the country, and neighbouring countries for economic and personal reasons, as well as due to insecurity. The country is concurrently experiencing other epidemics (e.g. cholera, vaccine-derived poliomyelitis, malaria, measles), and a long-term humanitarian crisis. Additionally, the fragile security situation in North Kivu and Ituri, further limits the implementation of response activities.As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1 Excludes probable cases reported following retrospective reclassification of cases with illness onset prior to the reporting period. One case reclassified from Bunia to neighboring Rwampara health zone following further investigation of the case’s household location.2 The number of cases is subject to change due to ongoing reclassification, retrospective investigation, and the availability of laboratory results.From 1 January through 31 January 2019, the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported fourteen additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, including three deaths. Details of these cases can be found by following the link to a separate document after this paragraph. Of the 14 cases reported in January, eight are from three separate clusters of cases. Cluster 1 involves three cases (listed as cases 1, 2 and 3) in Riyadh Province and cluster 2 involves two cases (listed as cases 4 and 5) in the city of Jeddah. Cluster 3 involves three cases (listed as cases 11, 13 and 14) in the city of Wadi Aldwaser and is currently ongoing. More details regarding the outbreak in Wadi Aldwaser and the implementation of interventions by the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Saudi Arabia will be provided in the next update.The link below provides details of the fourteen reported additional cases.From 2012 through 31 January 2019, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported globally to WHO under IHR (2005) is 2 298 with 811 associated deaths. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected member states.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.As of 15 February 2019, there is an ongoing outbreak of MERS in Wadi Aldwaser, which includes cases 11, 13 and 14 reported in the separate document linked above. WHO will provide details of the additional cases involved in this outbreak as well as intervention measures implemented by the MoH. The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures. Early identification, case management and isolation, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.Despite slightly fewer cases reported during the past week (Figure 1), current epidemiological indicators highlight that the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak is continuing with moderate intensity. Katwa and Butembo remain the major health zones of concern, while simultaneously, small clusters continue to occur in various geographically dispersed regions. During the last 21 days (23 January – 12 February 2019), 97 new cases have been reported from 13 health zones (Figure 2), including: Katwa (59), Butembo (12), Beni (7), Kyondo (4), Oicha (4), Vuhovi (3), Biena (2), Kalunguta (2), Komanda (1), Manguredjipa (1), Mabalako (1), Masereka (1), and Mutwanga (1).1 The recent case reported in the Komanda health zone was a resident of Katwa who was exposed to the virus, and subsequently travelled to both Bunia and Komanda. This case comes one month after the last reported case in Ituri Province; underscoring the high risks of reintroduction to previously affected areas, as well as the potential for spread to new ones.As of 12 February, 823 EVD cases2 (762 confirmed and 61 probable) have been reported, including 517 deaths (overall case fatality ratio: 63%). Cumulatively, cases have been reported from 118 of 287 health areas across 18 health zones, of which 37 health areas have reported a case in the last 21 days. Thus far, 283 people have been discharged from Ebola Treatment Centers (ETCs) and enrolled in a dedicated monitoring and support programme. One new health worker infection was reported in Katwa. To date, a total of 68 health workers have been infected.Main challenges this past week primarily pertain to community mistrust, particularly in Katwa, and the difficulty in encouraging community members to be more proactive in reporting suspected cases, presenting early to ETCs for treatment, and participating in community-based prevention and response efforts. However, in the face of these protracted challenges, response strategies have demonstrated to be effective in curtailing the spread of EVD. Fostering greater community trust by strengthening engagement with its members remains a top priority for response teams.On 13 February, the Ministry of Health (MoH) launched the Strategic Response Plan 3 (SRP 3). The plan lays out the response strategy, objectives and budget requirements for the MoH, WHO, and all implementing partners for the next six months (February through July 2019). SRP 3 takes into account recommendations from operational reviews, and builds on a series of new strategic directions that capitalize on lessons learned under the scope of SRP 2. Activities laid out aim to stop the transmission of EVD in North Kivu and Ituri provinces, and prevent its spread to other provinces and neighbouring countries.WHO remains confident that this outbreak can be successfully brought to an end through strategies outlined in SRP 3. To achieve the goals set out by the plan, MoH, WHO, and partners are appealing for US$ 148 million. WHO and partners count on the continued support of the international community to provide the required funding in order to stop this outbreak.*Map based on the latest available detailed line lists (data as of 11 February 2019), and excludes cases reported after this date, as well as cases with delayed/missing village or health area details. Categorization of cases by health zone may differ from the reported place of residence.For further information about the public health response actions by the MoH, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO continuously monitors changes to the epidemiological situation and context of the outbreak to ensure that support to the response is adapted to the evolving circumstances. The last review conducted on 7 February 2019, outlines the high risk the EVD outbreak poses at the national and regional levels, though global risk levels remain low. This EVD outbreak is affecting primarily the north-eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bordering Uganda, Rwanda, and South Sudan. There is a potential risk for transmission of EVD at the national and regional levels due to extensive travel between the affected areas, the rest of the country, and neighbouring countries for economic and personal reasons, as well as due to insecurity. The country is concurrently experiencing other epidemics (e.g. cholera, vaccine-derived poliomyelitis, malaria), and a long-term humanitarian crisis. Additionally, the fragile security situation in North Kivu and Ituri, further limits the implementation of response activities.As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1 Excludes newly probable cases from Katwa (7) and Komanda (5), who died in November and December 2018 and were reported during the period of 21 January to 10 February following a retrospective re-classification of cases.2 Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.The Ebola virus disease (EVD) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues with relatively high numbers of cases reported in recent weeks (Figure 1), and some encouraging signs. Katwa and Butembo health zones remain the epicentres of the outbreak, reporting 71% of cases in the last three weeks, with smaller clusters continuing to occur concurrently across a geographically dispersed area.As of 5 February, 789 EVD cases1 (735 confirmed and 54 probable) have been reported, including 488 deaths (overall case fatality ratio: 62%). Thus far, 267 people have been discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) and enrolled in a dedicated monitoring and support programme. Among cases with available information regarding age and sex, 58% (454/788) were female, and 30% (232/786) were aged less than 18 years; including 116 children under five years. Five new health worker infections were reported in Katwa (4) and Kalunguta (1); overall 67 health workers have been affected to date.During the last 21 days (16 January – 5 February 2019), 119 new cases have been reported from 13 health zones (Figure 2), including: Katwa (75), Butembo (9), Beni (8), Kyondo (5), Kayna (5), Oicha (4), Manguredjipa (4), Biena (2), Kalunguta (2), Mabalako (2), Masereka (1), Mutwanga (1), and Vuhovi (1)2. Current epidemiological analyses points to nosocomial transmission due to poor infection prevention and control (IPC) practices, persistent delays in detection and isolation of new cases, frequent community deaths (and subsequent contact with deceased), and transmission within family and community networks, as the main drivers of ongoing disease transmission. Insecurity and pockets of community resistance have continuously stifled efforts to combat these risks; nevertheless, response teams remain committed to actively strengthening community trust and participation in all affected areas, and are beginning to observe tangible improvements in Katwa and elsewhere.Komanda Health Zone has recently passed the most risky transmission period, with the last confirmed case reported on 11 January and all contacts completing the minimum follow-up period; however, a high degree of vigilance will need to be maintained to rapidly detect potential flare-ups and reintroductions here and in other previously affected areas.1 Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.2The five probable cases from Komanda (all of whom died in November 2018), were reported during the week of 21 – 27 January 2019 following a retrospective re-classification of cases.The MoH continues to strengthen response measures, with support from WHO and partners. For detailed information about the public health response actions by WHO and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO reviewed its risk assessment on 9 January 2019 for the outbreak and the risk remains very high at the national and regional levels; the global risk level remains low. This Ebola virus outbreak is affecting north-eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bordering Uganda, Rwanda and South Sudan. There is a potential risk for transmission of Ebola virus at the national and regional levels due to extensive travel between the affected areas, the rest of the country, and neighbouring countries for economic and personal reasons as well as due to insecurity. The country is concurrently experiencing other epidemics (e.g. cholera, vaccine-derived poliomyelitis, malaria), and a long-term humanitarian crisis. Additionally, the security situation in North Kivu and Ituri at times limits the implementation of response activities.As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  The Ministry of Health (MoH), WHO and partners have continued to face challenges in the containment and control of the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The number of reported cases increased during recent weeks, most notably from the Katwa health zone where response teams have faced pockets of community mistrust. The outbreak has also extended southwards to Kayina health zone, a high security risk area. Teams are working actively to build community trust and scale up response activities around these new clusters.Figure 1 shows that as of 22 January 2019, there have been a total of 713 EVD cases1 (664 confirmed and 49 probable), including 439 deaths (overall case fatality ratio: 62%). Thus far, 247 people have been discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs), with many having enrolled in a dedicated program for monitoring and supporting survivors. Among cases with a reported age and sex, 59% (420/710) of cases were female, and 30% (214/708) were aged less than 18 years; including 108 infants and children under 5 years. Sixty-one healthcare workers have been infected to date.During the last 21 days (2 January – 22 January 2019), 102 new cases have been reported from 13 health zones (Figure 2), including: Katwa (62), Butembo (12), Oicha (6), Kayina (5), Beni (2), Manguredjipa (3), Kyondo (3), Kalungata (2), Komanda (1), Musienene (2), Biena (2), Mabalako (1), and Vuhovi (1). The current outbreak hotspots of Butembo and Katwa encompass an urban area with a population of approximately one million people. Of the 148 cases reported in Katwa to date, less than half (55/148) were registered as contacts at the time of illness onset. Moreover, 10% (14/148) of these cases comprised of healthcare workers, and among those with available information, 42% (45/107) reported having attended a funeral in the weeks prior to illness onset. Collectively, these figures suggest that the observed increase in Katwa is being driven by a combination of both healthcare facility and community-based transmissions. Health protection and control measures such as infection prevention and control in health centers, vaccination for healthcare and other frontline workers, and safe and dignified burial practices, are being strengthened to interrupt the chains of transmission.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.The MoH continues to strengthen response measures, with support from WHO and partners. Priorities include coordination, surveillance, contact tracing, laboratory capacity, infection prevention and control, clinical management of patients, vaccination, risk communication and community engagement, psychosocial support, safe and dignified burials, cross-border surveillance, and preparedness activities in neighbouring provinces and countries.For detailed information about the public health response actions by WHO and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.The Ministry of Health (MoH), WHO and partners continue to respond to the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in one of the most complex settings possible. A high number of cases are still being reported, most notably from the metropolitan areas of Katwa Health Zone during the past week. The decline in case incidence has continued in Beni; a positive indication of how effective the response can be despite multiple challenges.Trends in the number of new cases occurring (Figure 1) reflect the continuation of the outbreak across a number of geographically dispersed areas. During the last 21 days (26 December 2018 through 15 January 2019), 79 new cases have been reported from 11 health zones (Figure 2), including: Katwa (36), Oicha (14), Butembo (11), Beni (4), Mabalako (4), Kalungata (3), Kyondo (3), Komanda (1), Musienene (1), Biena (1) and Manguredjipa (1). The latter is a newly affected health zone, although the case likely acquired the infection in Mabalako Health Zone.As of 15 January 2019, there have been a total of 663 EVD cases 1(614 confirmed and 49 probable), including 407 deaths (overall case fatality ratio: 61%). Thus far, 237 people have been discharged from Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) and enrolled in a dedicated program for monitoring and supporting survivors. Among confirmed and probable cases with age and sex reported, 59% (391/661) were female and 30% (200/658) were children less than 18 years. This includes a high number of cases in infants aged less than one year (43) and 1-4 years (61).All alerts in affected areas, in other provinces, and in neighbouring countries continue to be monitored and investigated. Since the last report was published, alerts were investigated in several provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda. To date, EVD has been ruled out in all alerts outside the outbreak affected areas.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.The MoH continues to strengthen response measures, with support from WHO and partners. Priorities include coordination, surveillance, contact tracing, laboratory capacity, infection prevention and control, clinical management of patients, vaccination, risk communication and community engagement, psychosocial support, safe and dignified burials, cross-border surveillance, and preparedness activities in neighbouring provinces and countries.For detailed information about the public health response actions by WHO and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.16 January 2019From 1 December 2018 through 31 December 2018, the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported five additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection. Details of these cases can be found in a separate document (see link below).From 2012 through 31 December 2018, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported globally to WHO under IHR (2005) is 2 279 with 806 associated deaths. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected Member States.Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to dromedary camels, animal products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or humans (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV are non-specific. Therefore, healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.10 January 2019WHO and partners continue to respond to the ongoing Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in one of the most complex settings possible. A decline in case incidence has been seen in Beni, the former epicentre. This is a strong positive indication of how effective the response can be despite multiple challenges. However, in Beni and elsewhere, trends must be interpreted cautiously, as delayed detection of cases is expected following recent temporary disruption in response activities due to insecurity. Nevertheless, WHO and partners remain committed, under the government’s leadership and through collaboration across agencies, to addressing challenges and ending the outbreak.As of 8 January 2019, there have been a total of 628 EVD cases1 (580 confirmed and 48 probable), including 383 deaths (overall case fatality ratio: 61%). Thus far, 222 people have recovered, been discharged from an Ebola Treatment Centre (ETC) and enrolled in a dedicated program for monitoring and supporting survivors.During the last 21 days (19 December 2018 to 8 January 2019), cases have been reported from ten health zones where the outbreak remains active, including: Katwa (18), Butembo (16), Oicha (13), Beni (13), Kalungata (6), Mabalako (5), Komanda (3), Musienene (2), Kyondo (1) and Nyankunde (1). Overall, cases have occurred in localised hotspots within 16 health zones found in North Kivu and Ituri provinces (Figure 1). Surveillance activities are being maintained to rapidly detect resurgences or reintroduction events in all areas.Trends in numbers of new cases occurring (Figure 2) reflect the continuation of the outbreak across these geographically dispersed areas, with encouraging declines in case incidence in areas such as Beni. Hard-earned progress could still be lost from prolonged periods of insecurity hampering containment efforts.Amongst confirmed and probable EVD cases, 61% (385/628) were female and 30% (189/628) were children aged less than 18 years. This includes a high number of cases in infants aged less than 1 year (38) and 1-4 years (58). While investigations to understand the risk factors for this disproportionate burden are ongoing, response teams continue to prioritise these population groups to mitigate, wherever possible, the risk of transmission.All alerts in affected areas, in other provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in neighbouring countries continue to be monitored and investigated. Since the last report was published, alerts were investigated in several provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, South Sudan, Rwanda and in a traveller returning from Burundi to Sweden. To date, EVD has been ruled out in all alerts outside the outbreak affected areas. International travellers who may have come into contact with the virus, including a doctor who returned to the United States of America after providing medical assistance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are also being followed closely; all remain asymptomatic.*Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.The MoH continues to strengthen response measures, with support from WHO and partners. Priorities include coordination, surveillance, contact tracing, laboratory capacity, infection prevention and control, clinical management of patients, vaccination, risk communication and community engagement, psychosocial support, safe and dignified burials, cross-border surveillance, and preparedness activities in neighbouring provinces and countries.For detailed information about the public health response actions by WHO and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa:WHO reviewed its risk assessment for the outbreak and the risk remains very high at the national and regional levels; the global risk level remains low. This outbreak of EVD is affecting north-eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bordering Uganda, Rwanda and South Sudan. There is a potential risk for transmission of EVD at the national and regional levels due to extensive travel between the affected areas, the rest of the country, and neighbouring countries for economic and personal reasons as well as due to insecurity. The country is concurrently experiencing other epidemics (e.g. cholera, vaccine-derived poliomyelitis, malaria), and a long-term humanitarian crisis. Additionally, the security situation in North Kivu and Ituri at times limits the implementation of response activities.As the risk of national and regional spread is very high, it is important for neighbouring provinces and countries to enhance surveillance and preparedness activities. The International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) Emergency Committee has advised that failing to intensify these preparedness and surveillance activities would lead to worsening conditions and further spread. WHO will continue to work with neighbouring countries and partners to ensure that health authorities are alerted and are operationally prepared to respond.International traffic: WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, and trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. There is currently no licensed vaccine to protect people from the Ebola virus. Therefore, any requirements for certificates of Ebola vaccination are not a reasonable basis for restricting movement across borders or the issuance of visas for passengers leaving the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO continues to closely monitor and, if necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event. Currently, no country has implemented travel measures that significantly interfere with international traffic to and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Travellers should seek medical advice before travel and should practice good hygiene.For more information, see:  1Data in recent weeks are subject to delays in case confirmation and reporting, as well as ongoing data cleaning – trends during this period should be interpreted cautiously.Detailed information concerning these cases can be found in a separate document (see link below). One of the cases reported is a health care worker (case no. 5). The limited outbreak in Buridah, Saudi Arabia reported in the previous DON (published on 26 January 2017) is now over. A total of 6 cases were linked to this hospital outbreak. All contacts have been followed for the 14 day period and no further cases have been identified.Globally, since September 2012, 1905 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV including at least 677 related deaths have been reported to WHO.MERS-CoV causes severe human infections resulting in high mortality and has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings.The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to animals or animal products (for example, following contact with dromedaries) or human source (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns.Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV are non-specific. Therefore, health-care workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Until more is understood about MERS-CoV, people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons are considered to be at high risk of severe disease from MERS-CoV infection. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.